<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-3" id="chapter-3-15" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XV</h3>
			<p>Pelle was now a man; he was able to look after his own affairs and a little more besides; and he was capable of weighing one circumstance against another. He had thrust aside his horror concerning Due’s fate, and once again saw light in the future. But this horror still lurked within his mind, corroding everything else, lending everything a gloomy, sinister hue. Over his brow brooded a dark cloud, as to which he himself was not quite clear. But Ellen saw it and stroked it away with her soft fingers, in order to make it disappear. It formed a curious contrast to his fresh, ruddy face, like a meaningless threat upon a fine spring day.</p>
			<p>He began to be conscious of confidence like a sustaining strength. It was not only in the “Ark” that he was idolized; his comrades looked up to him; if there was anything important in hand their eyes involuntarily turned to him. Although he had, thoughtlessly enough, well-nigh wrecked the organism in order to come to grips with Meyer, he had fully made up for his action, and the Union was now stronger than ever, and this was his doing. So he could stretch his limbs and give a little thought to his own affairs.</p>
			<p>He and Ellen felt a warm longing to come together and live in their own little home. There were many objections that might be opposed to such a course, and he was not blind to them. Pelle was a valiant worker, but his earnings were not so large that one could found a family on them; it was the naked truth that even a good worker could not properly support a wife and children. He counted on children as a matter of course, and the day would come also when Father Lasse would no longer be able to earn his daily bread. But that day lay still in the remote future, and, on the other hand, it was no more expensive to live with a companion than alone⁠—if that companion was a good and saving wife. If a man meant to enjoy some little share of the joy of life, he must close his eyes and leap over all obstacles, and for once put his trust in the exceptional.</p>
			<p>“It’ll soon be better, too,” said Mason Stolpe. “Things look bad now in most trades, but you see yourself, how everything is drawing to a great crisis. Give progress a kick behind and ask her to hurry herself a little⁠—there’s something to be gained by that. A man ought to marry while he’s still young; what’s the good of going about and hankering after one another?”</p>
			<p>Madam Stolpe was, as always, of his opinion. “We married and enjoyed the sweetness of it while our blood was still young. That’s why we have something now that we can depend on,” she said simply, looking at Pelle.</p>
			<p>So it was determined that the wedding should be held that spring. In March the youngest son would complete his apprenticeship, so that the wedding feast and the journeyman’s feast could be celebrated simultaneously.</p>
			<p>On the canal, just opposite the prison, a little two-roomed dwelling was standing vacant, and this they rented. Mason Stolpe wanted to have the young couple to live out by the North Bridge, “among respectable people,” but Pelle had become attached to this quarter. Moreover, he had a host of customers there, which would give him a foothold, and there, too, were the canals. For Pelle, the canals were a window opening on the outer world; they gave his mind a sense of liberty; he always felt oppressed among the stone walls by the North Bridge. Ellen let him choose⁠—it was indifferent to her where they lived. She would gladly have gone to the end of the world with him, in order to yield herself.</p>
			<p>She had saved a little money in her situation, and Pelle also had a little put by; he was wise in his generation, and cut down all their necessities. When Ellen was free they rummaged about buying things for their home. Many things they bought secondhand, for cheapness, but not for the bedroom; there everything was to be brand-new!</p>
			<p>It was a glorious time, in which every hour was full of its own rich significance; there was no room for brooding or for care. Ellen often came running in to drag him from his work; he must come with her and look at something or other⁠—one could get it so cheap⁠—but quickly, quickly, before it should be gone! On her “off” Sundays she would reduce the little home to order, and afterward they would walk arm in arm through the city, and visit the old people.</p>
			<p>Pelle had had so much to do with the affairs of others, and had given so little thought to his own, that it was delightful, for once in a way, to be able to rest and think of himself. The crowded outer world went drifting far away from him; he barely glanced at it as he built his nest; he thought no more about social problems than the birds that nest in spring.</p>
			<p>And one day Pelle carried his possessions to his new home, and for the last time lay down to sleep in the “Ark.” There was no future for anyone here; only the shipwrecked sought an abiding refuge within these walls. It was time for Pelle to move on. Yet from all this raggedness and overcrowding rose a voice which one did not hear elsewhere; a careless twittering, like that of unlucky birds that sit and plume their feathers when a little sunlight falls on them. He looked back on the time he had spent here with pensive melancholy.</p>
			<p>On the night before his wedding he lay restlessly tossing to and fro. Something seemed to follow him in his sleep. At last he woke, and was sensible of a stifled moaning, that came and went with long intervals in between, as though the “Ark” itself were moaning in an evil dream. Suddenly he stood up, lit the lamp, and began to polish his wedding-boots, which were still on the lasts, so that they might retain their handsome shape. Lasse was still asleep, and the long gangway outside lay still in slumber.</p>
			<p>The sound returned, louder and more long-drawn, and something about it reminded him of Stone Farm, and awaked the horror of his childish days. He sat and sweated at his work. Suddenly he heard someone outside⁠—someone who groped along the gangway and fumbled at his door. He sprang forward and opened it. Suspense ran through his body like an icy shudder. Outside stood Hanne’s mother, shivering in the morning cold.</p>
			<p>“Pelle,” she whispered anxiously, “it’s so near now⁠—would you run and fetch Madam Blom from Market Street? I can’t leave Hanne. And I ought to be wishing you happiness, too.”</p>
			<p>The errand was not precisely convenient, nevertheless, he ran oft. And then he sat listening, working still, but as quietly as possible, in order not to wake Father Lasse. But then it was time for the children to get up; for the last time he knocked on the wall and heard Marie’s sleepy “Ye⁠—es!” At the same moment the silence of night was broken; the inmates tumbled out and ran barefooted to the lavatories, slamming their doors. “The Princess is lamenting,” they told one another. “She’s lamenting because she’s lost what she’ll never get again.” Then the moaning rose to a loud shriek, and suddenly it was silent over there.</p>
			<p>Poor Hanne! Now she had another to care for⁠—and who was its father? Hard times were in store for her.</p>
			<p>Lasse was not going to work today, although the wedding-feast was not to be held until the afternoon. He was in a solemn mood, from the earliest morning, and admonished Pelle not to lay things crosswise, and the like. Pelle laughed every time.</p>
			<p>“Yes, you laugh,” said Lasse, “but this is an important day⁠—perhaps the most important in your life. You ought to take care lest the first trifling thing you do should ruin everything.”</p>
			<p>He pottered about, treating everything as an omen. He was delighted with the sun⁠—it rose out of a sack and grew brighter and brighter in the course of the day. It was never lucky for the sun to begin too blazing.</p>
			<p>Marie went to and fro, considering Pelle with an expression of suppressed anxiety, like a mother who is sending her child into the world, and strives hard to seem cheerful, thought Pelle. Yes, yes, she had been like a mother to him in many senses, although she was only a child; she had taken him into her nest as a little forsaken bird, and with amazement had seen him grow. He had secretly helped her when he could. But what was that in comparison with the singing that had made his work easy, when he saw how the three waifs accepted things as they were, building their whole existence on nothing? Who would help them now over the difficult places without letting them see the helping hand? He must keep watchful eye on them.</p>
			<p>Marie’s cheeks were a hectic red, and her eyes were shining when he held her roughened hands in his and thanked her for being such a good neighbor. Her narrow chest was working, and a reflection of hidden beauty rested upon her. Pelle had taught her blood to find the way to her colorless face; whenever she was brought into intimate contact with him or his affairs, her cheeks glowed, and every time a little of the color was left behind. It was as though his vitality forced the sap to flow upward in her, in sympathy, and now she stood before him, trying to burst her stunted shell, and unfold her gracious capacities before him, and as yet was unable to do so. Suddenly she fell upon his breast. “Pelle, Pelle,” she said, hiding her face against him. And then she ran into her own room.</p>
			<p>Lasse and Pelle carried the last things over to the new home, and put everything tidy; then they dressed themselves in their best and set out for the Stoples’ home. Pelle was wearing a top-hat for the first time in his life, and looked quite magnificent in it. “You are like a big city chap,” said Lasse, who could not look at him often enough. “But what do you think they’ll say of old Lasse? They are halfway fine folks themselves, and I don’t know how to conduct myself. Wouldn’t it perhaps be better if I were to turn back?”</p>
			<p>“Don’t talk like that, father!” said Pelle.</p>
			<p>Lasse was monstrously pleased at the idea of attending the wedding-feast, but he had all sorts of misgivings. These last years had made him shy of strangers, and he liked to creep into corners. His holiday clothes, moreover, were worn out, and his everyday things were patched and mended; his long coat he had hired expressly for the occasion, while the white collar and cuffs belonged to Peter. He did not feel at all at home in his clothes, and looked like an embarrassed schoolboy waiting for confirmation.</p>
			<p>At the Stolpes’ the whole household was topsy-turvy. The guests who were to go to the church had already arrived; they were fidgeting about in the living-room and whistling to themselves, or looking out into the street, and feeling bored. Stople’s writing-table had been turned into a sideboard, and the brothers were opening bottles of beer and politely pressing everybody: “Do take a sandwich with it⁠—you’ll get a dry throat standing so long and saying nothing.”</p>
			<p>In the best room Stolpe was pacing up and down and muttering. He was in his shirtsleeves, waiting until it was his turn to use the bedroom, where Ellen and her mother had locked themselves in. From time to time the door was opened a little, and Ellen’s bare white arm appeared, as she threw her father some article of attire. Then Pelle’s heart began to thump.</p>
			<p>On the windowsill stood Madam Stolpe’s myrtle; it was stripped quite bare.</p>
			<p>Now Stolpe came back; he was ready! Pelle had only to button his collar for him. He took Lasse’s hand and then went to fetch <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The Working Man</i>. “Now you just ought to hear this, what they say of your son,” he said, and began to read:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>“Our young party-member, Pelle, today celebrates his nuptials with the daughter of one of the oldest and most respected members of the party, Mason Stolpe. This young man, who has already done a great deal of work for the Cause, was last night unanimously proposed as President of his organization. We give the young couple our best wishes for the future.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“That speaks for itself, eh?” Stolpe handed the paper to his guests.</p>
			<p>“Yes, that looks well indeed,” they said, passing the paper from hand to hand. Lasse moved his lips as though he, too, were reading the notice through. “Yes, devilish good, and they know how to put these things,” he said, delighted.</p>
			<p>“But what’s wrong with Petersen⁠—is he going to resign?” asked Stolpe.</p>
			<p>“He is ill,” replied Pelle. “But I wasn’t there last night, so I don’t know anything about it.” Stolpe gazed at him, astonished.</p>
			<p>Madam Stolpe came in and drew Pelle into the bedroom, where Ellen stood like a snow-white revelation, with a long veil and a myrtle-wreath in her hair. “Really you two are supposed not to see one another, but I think that’s wrong,” she said, and with a loving glance she pushed them into each other’s arms.</p>
			<p>Frederik, who was leaning out of the window, in order to watch for the carriage, came and thundered on the door. “The carriage is there, children!” he roared, in quite a needlessly loud voice. “The carriage is there!”</p>
			<p>And they drove away in it, although the church was only a few steps distant. Pelle scarcely knew what happened to him after that, until he found himself back in the carriage; they had to nudge him every time he had to do anything. He saw no one but Ellen.</p>
			<p>She was his sun; the rest meant nothing to him. At the altar he had seized her hand and held it in his during the whole service.</p>
			<p>Frederik had remained at home, in order to admit, receive messages and people who came to offer their congratulations. As they returned he leaned out of the window and threw crackers and detonating pellets under the horses’ feet, as a salute to the bridal pair.</p>
			<p>People drank wine, touched glasses with the young couple, and examined the wedding-presents. Stolpe looked to see the time; it was still quite early. “You must go for a bit of a stroll, father,” said Madam Stolpe. “We can’t eat anything for a couple of hours yet.” So the men went across to Ventegodt’s beer-garden, in order to play a game of skittles, while the women prepared the food.</p>
			<p>Pelle would rather have stopped in the house with Ellen, but he must not; he and Lasse went together. Lasse had not yet properly wished Pelle happiness; he had waited until they should be alone.</p>
			<p>“Well, happiness and all blessings, my boy,” he said, much moved, as he pressed Pelle’s hand. “Now you, too, are a man with a family and responsibilities. Now don’t you forget that the women are like children. In serious matters you mustn’t be too ceremonious with them, but tell them, short and plain. This is to be so! It goes down best with them. If once a man begins discussing too much with them, then they don’t know which way they want to go. Otherwise they are quite all right, and it’s easy to get on with them⁠—if one only treats them well. I never found it any trouble, for they like a firm hand over them. You’ve reason to be proud of your parents-in-law; they are capital people, even if they are a bit proud of their calling. And Ellen will make you a good wife⁠—if I know anything of women. She’ll attend to her own affairs and she’ll understand how to save what’s left over. Long in the body she is, like a fruitful cow⁠—she won’t fail you in the matter of children.”</p>
			<p>Outdoors in the beer-garden Swedish punch was served, and Lasse’s spirits began to rise. He tried to play at skittles⁠—he had never done so before; and he plucked up courage to utter witticisms.</p>
			<p>The others laughed, and Lasse drew himself up and came out of his shell. “Splendid people, the Copenhageners!” he whispered to Pelle. “A ready hand for spending, and they’ve got a witty word ready for everything.”</p>
			<p>Before anyone noticed it had grown dark, and now they must be home!</p>
			<p>At home the table was laid, and the rest of the guests had come. Madam Stolpe was already quite nervous, they had stopped away so long. “Now we’ll all wobble a bit on our legs,” whispered Stolpe, in the entry; “then my wife will go for us! Well, mother, have you got a warm welcome ready for us?” he asked, as he tumbled into the room.</p>
			<p>“Ah, you donkey, do you think I don’t know you?” cried Madam Stolpe, laughing. “No, one needn’t go searching in the taverns for my man!”</p>
			<p>Pelle went straight up to Ellen in the kitchen and led her away. Hand in hand they went round the rooms, looking at the last presents to arrive. There was a table-lamp, a dish-cover in German silver, and some enamelled cooking-utensils. Someone, too, had sent a little china figure of a child in swaddling-clothes, but had forgotten to attach his name.</p>
			<p>Ellen led Pelle out into the entry, in order to embrace him, but there stood Morten, taking off his things. Then they fled into the kitchen, but the hired cook was in possession; at length they found an undisturbed haven in the bedroom. Ellen wound her arms round Pelle’s neck and gazed at him in silence, quite lost in happiness and longing. And Pelle pressed the beloved, slender, girlish body against his own, and looked deep in her eyes, which were dark and shadowy as velvet, as they drank in the light in his. His heart swelled within him, and he felt that he was unspeakably fortunate⁠—richer than anyone else in the whole world⁠—because of the treasure that he held in his arms. Silently he vowed to himself that he would protect her and cherish her and have no other thought than to make her happy.</p>
			<p>An impatient trampling sounded from the other room. “The young couple⁠—the young couple!” they were calling. Pelle and Ellen hastened in, each by a different door. The others were standing in their places at the table, and were waiting for Pelle and Ellen to take their seats. “Well, it isn’t difficult to see what she’s been about!” said Stolpe teasingly. “One has only to look at the lass’s peepers⁠—such a pair of glowing coals!”</p>
			<p>Otto Stolpe, the slater, was spokesman, and opened the banquet by offering brandy. “A drop of spirits,” he said to each: “we must make sure there’s a vent to the gutter, or the whole thing will soon get stopped up.”</p>
			<p>“Now, take something, people!” cried Stolpe, from the head of the table, where he was carving a loin of roast pork. “Up with the bricks there!” He had the young couple on his right and the newly-baked journeyman on his left. On the table before him stood a new bedroom chamber with a white wooden cover to it; the guests glanced at it and smiled at one another. “What are you staring at?” he asked solemnly. “If you need anything, let the cat out of the bag!”</p>
			<p>“Ah, it’s the tureen there!” said his brother, the carpenter, without moving a muscle. “My wife would be glad to borrow it a moment, she says.”</p>
			<p>His wife, taken aback, started up and gave him a thwack on the back. “Monster!” she said, half ashamed, and laughing. “The men must always make a fool of somebody!”</p>
			<p>Then they all set to, and for a while eating stopped their mouths. From time to time some droll remark was made. “Some sit and do themselves proud, while others do the drudging,” said the Vanishing Man, Otto’s comrade. Which was to say that he had finished his pork. “Give him one in the mouth, mother!” said Stolpe.</p>
			<p>When their hunger was satisfied the witticisms began to fly. Morten’s present was a great wedding-cake. It was a real work of art; he had made it in the form of a pyramid. On the summit stood a youthful couple, made of sugar, who held one another embraced, while behind them was a highly glazed representation of the rising sun. Up the steps of the pyramid various other figures were scrambling to the top, holding their arms outstretched toward the summit. Wine was poured out when they came to the cake, and Morten made a little speech in Pelle’s honor, in which he spoke of loyalty toward the new comrade whom he had chosen. Apparently the speech concerned Ellen only, but Pelle understood that his words were meant to be much more comprehensive; they had a double meaning all the time.</p>
			<p>“Thank you, Morten,” he said, much moved, and he touched glasses with him.</p>
			<p>Then Stolpe delivered a speech admonishing the newly-married pair. This was full of precious conceits and was received with jubilation.</p>
			<p>“Now you see how father can speak,” said Madam Stolpe. “When nothing depends on it then he can speak!”</p>
			<p>“What’s that you say, mother?” cried Stolpe, astonished. He was not accustomed to criticism from that source. “Just listen to that now⁠—one’s own wife is beginning to pull away the scaffolding-poles from under one!”</p>
			<p>“Well, that’s what I say!” she rejoined, looking at him boldly. Her face was quite heated with wine. “Does anyone stand in the front of things like father does? He was the first, and he has been always the most zealous; he has done a good stroke of work, more than most men. And today he might well have been one of the leaders and have called the tune, if it weren’t for that damned hiccuping. He’s a clever man, and his comrades respect him too, but what does all that signify if a man hiccups? Every time he stands on the speaker’s platform he has the hiccups.”</p>
			<p>“And yet it isn’t caused by brandy?” said the thickset little Vanishing Man, Albert Olsen.</p>
			<p>“Oh, no, father has never gone in for bottle agitation,” replied Madam Stolpe.</p>
			<p>“That was a fine speech that mother made about me,” said Stolpe, laughing, “and she didn’t hiccup. It is astonishing, though⁠—there are some people who can’t. But now it’s your turn, Frederik. Now you have become a journeyman and must accept the responsibility yourself for doing things according to plumb-line and square. We have worked on the scaffold together and we know one another pretty well. Many a time you’ve been a clown and many a time a sheep, and a box on the ears from your old man has never been lacking. But that was in your fledgling years. When only you made up your mind there was no fault to be found with you. I will say this to your credit⁠—that you know your trade⁠—you needn’t be shamed by anybody. Show what you can do, my lad! Do your day’s work so that your comrades don’t need to take you in tow, and never shirk when it comes to your turn!”</p>
			<p>“Don’t cheat the drinker of his bottle, either,” said Albert Olsen, interrupting. Otto nudged him in the ribs.</p>
			<p>“No, don’t do that,” said Stolpe, and he laughed. “There are still two things,” he added seriously. “Take care the girls don’t get running about under the scaffold in working hours, that doesn’t look well; and always uphold the fellowship. There is nothing more despicable than the name of strikebreaker.”</p>
			<p>“Hear, hear!” resounded about the table. “A true word!”</p>
			<p>Frederik sat listening with an embarrassed smile.</p>
			<p>He was dressed in a new suit of the white clothes of his calling, and on his round chin grew a few dark downy hairs, which he fingered every other moment. He was waiting excitedly until the old man had finished, so that he might drink brotherhood with him.</p>
			<p>“And now, my lad,” said Stolpe, taking the cover from the “tureen,” “now you are admitted to the corporation of masons, and you are welcome! Health, my lad.” And with a sly little twinkle of his eye, he set the utensil to his mouth, and drank.</p>
			<p>“Health, father!” replied Frederik, with shining eyes, as his father passed him the drinking-bowl. Then it went round the table. The women shrieked before they drank; it was full of Bavarian beer, and in the amber fluid swam Bavarian sausages. And while the drinking-bowl made its cheerful round, Stolpe struck up with the Song of the Mason:</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
				<p>
					<span>“The man up there in snowy cap and blouse,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He is a mason, any fool could swear.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Just give him stone and lime, he’ll build a house</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Fine as a palace, up in empty air!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Down in the street below stands half the town:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, ah! Na, na!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The scaffold sways, but it won’t fall down!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Down in the street he’s wobbly in his tread,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He tumbles into every cellar door;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That’s ’cause his home is in the clouds o’erhead,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Where all the little birds about him soar.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Up there he works away with peaceful mind:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, ah! Na, na!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The scaffold swings in the boisterous wind!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“What it is to be giddy no mason knows:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Left to himself he’d build for ever,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stone upon stone, till in Heaven, I s’pose!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>But up comes the Law, and says⁠—Stop now, clever!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>There lives the Almighty, so just come off!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, ah! Na, na!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sheer slavery this, but he lets them scoff!</span>
				</p>
				<p>
					<span>“Before he knows it the work has passed:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>He measures all over and reckons it up.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His wages are safe in his breeches at last,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And he clatters off home to rest and to sup.</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And a goodly wage he’s got in his pocket:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ah, ah! Na, na!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>The scaffold creaks to the winds that rock it!”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>The little thickset slater sat with both arms on the table, staring right in front of him with veiled eyes. When the song was over he raised his head a little. “Yes, that may be all very fine⁠—for those it concerns. But the slater, he climbs higher than the mason.” His face was purple.</p>
			<p>“Now, comrade, let well alone,” said Stolpe comfortably. “It isn’t the question, tonight, who climbs highest, it’s a question of amusing ourselves merely.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, that may be,” replied Olsen, letting his head sink again. “But the slater, he climbs the highest.” After which he sat there murmuring to himself.</p>
			<p>“Just leave him alone,” whispered Otto. “Otherwise he’ll get in one of his Berserker rages. Don’t be so grumpy, old fellow,” he said, laying his arm on Olsen’s shoulders. “No one can compete with you in the art of tumbling down, anyhow!”</p>
			<p>The Vanishing Man was so called because he was in the habit⁠—while lying quite quietly on the roof at work⁠—of suddenly sliding downward and disappearing into the street below. He had several times fallen from the roof of a house without coming to any harm; but on one occasion he had broken both legs, and had become visibly bowlegged in consequence. In order to appease him, Otto, who was his comrade, related how he had fallen down on the last occasion.</p>
			<p>“We were lying on the roof, working away, he and I, and damned cold it was. He, of course, had untied the safety-rope, and as we were lying there quite comfortably and chatting, all of a sudden he was off. ‘The devil!’ I shouted to the others, ‘now the Vanishing Man has fallen down again!’ And we ran down the stairs as quick as we could. We weren’t in a humor for any fool’s tricks, as you may suppose. But there was no Albert Olsen lying on the pavement. ‘Damn and blast it all, where has the Vanisher got to?’ we said, and we stared at one another, stupefied. And then I accidentally glanced across at a beer-cellar opposite, and there, by God, he was sitting at the basement window, winking at us so, with his forefinger to his nose, making signs to us to go down and have a glass of beer with him. ‘I was so accursedly thirsty,’ was all he said; ‘I couldn’t wait to run down the stairs!’ ”</p>
			<p>The general laughter appeased the Vanishing Man. “Who’ll give me a glass of beer?” he said, rising with difficulty. He got his beer and sat down in a corner.</p>
			<p>Stolpe was sitting at the table playing with his canary, which had to partake of its share in the feast. The bird sat on his red ear and fixed its claws in his hair, then hopped onto his arm and along it onto the table. Stolpe kept on asking it, “What would you like to smoke, Hansie?” “Peep!” replied the canary, every time. Then they all laughed. “Hansie would like a pipe!”</p>
			<p>“How clever he is, to answer like that!” said the women.</p>
			<p>“Clever?⁠—ay, and he’s sly too! Once we bought a little wife for him; mother didn’t think it fair that he shouldn’t know what love is. Well, they married themselves very nicely, and the little wife lay two eggs. But when she wanted to begin to sit Hansie got sulky; he kept on calling to her to come out on the perch. Well, she wouldn’t, and one fine day, when she wanted to get something to eat, he hopped in and threw the eggs out between the bars! He was jealous⁠—the rascal! Yes, animals are wonderfully clever⁠—stupendous it is, that such a little thing as that could think that out! Now, now, just look at him!”</p>
			<p>Hansie had hopped onto the table and had made his way to the remainder of the cake. He was sitting on the edge of the dish, cheerfully flirting his tail as he pecked away. Suddenly something fell upon the tablecloth. “Lord bless me,” cried Stolpe, in consternation, “if that had been anyone else! Wouldn’t you have heard mother carry on!”</p>
			<p>Old Lasse was near exploding at this. He had never before been in such pleasant company. “It’s just as if one had come upon a dozen of Brother Kalle’s sort,” he whispered to Pelle. Pelle smiled absently. Ellen was holding his hand in her lap and playing with his fingers.</p>
			<p>A telegram of congratulation came for Pelle from his Union, and this brought the conversation back to more serious matters. Morten and Stolpe became involved in a dispute concerning the labor movement; Morten considered that they did not sufficiently consider the individual, but attached too much importance to the voice of the masses. In his opinion the revolution must come from within.</p>
			<p>“No,” said Stolpe, “that leads to nothing. But if we could get our comrades into Parliament and obtain a majority, then we should build up the State according to our own programme, and that is in every respect a legal one!”</p>
			<p>“Yes, but it’s a question of daily bread,” said Morten, with energy. “Hungry people can’t sit down and try to become a majority; while the grass grows the cow starves! They ought to help themselves. If they do not, their self-consciousness is imperfect; they must wake up to the consciousness of their own human value. If there were a law forbidding the poor man to breathe the air, do you think he’d stop doing so? He simply could not. It’s painful for him to look on at others eating when he gets nothing himself. He is wanting in physical courage. And so society profits by his disadvantage. What has the poor man to do with the law? He stands outside all that! A man mustn’t starve his horse or his dog, but the State which forbids him to do so starves its own workers. I believe they’ll have to pay for preaching obedience to the poor; we are getting bad material for the now order of society that we hope to found some day.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, but we don’t obey the laws out of respect for the commands of a capitalist society,” said Stolpe, somewhat uncertainly, “but out of regard for ourselves. God pity the poor man if he takes the law into his own hands!”</p>
			<p>“Still, it keeps the wound fresh! As for all the others, who go hungry in silence, what do they do? There are too few of them, alas⁠—there’s room in the prisons for them! But if everyone who was hungry would stick his arm through a shop window and help himself⁠—then the question of maintenance would soon be solved. They couldn’t put the whole nation in prison! Now, hunger is yet another human virtue, which is often practised until men die of it⁠—for the profit of those who hoard wealth. They pat the poor, brave man on the back because he’s so obedient to the law. What more can he want?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, devil take it, of course it’s all topsy-turvy,” replied Stolpe. “But that’s precisely the reason why⁠—No, no, you won’t persuade me, my young friend! You seem to me a good deal too ‘red.’ It wouldn’t do! Now I’ve been concerned in the movement from the very first day, and no one can say that Stolpe is afraid to risk his skin; but that way wouldn’t suit me. We have always held to the same course, and everything that we have won we have taken on account.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, that’s true,” interrupted Frau Stolpe. “When I look back to those early years and then consider these I can scarcely believe it’s true. Then it was all we could do to find safe shelter, even among people of our own standing; they annoyed us in every possible way, and hated father because he wasn’t such a sheep as they were, but used to concern himself about their affairs. Every time I went out of the kitchen door I’d find a filthy rag of dishcloth hung over the handle, and they smeared much worse things than that over the door⁠—and whose doing was it? I never told father; he would have been so enraged he would have torn the whole house down to find the guilty person. No, father had enough to contend against already. But now: ‘Ah, here comes Stolpe⁠—Hurrah! Long live Stolpe! One must show respect to Stolpe, the veteran!’ ”</p>
			<p>“That may be all very fine,” muttered Albert Olsen, “but the slater, he climbs the highest.” He was sitting with sunken head, staring angrily before him.</p>
			<p>“To be sure he climbs highest,” said the women. “No one says he doesn’t.”</p>
			<p>“Leave him alone,” said Otto; “he’s had a drop too much!”</p>
			<p>“Then he should take a walk in the fresh air and not sit there and make himself disagreeable,” said Madam Stolpe, with a good deal of temper.</p>
			<p>The Vanishing Man rose with an effort. “Do you say a walk in the fresh air, Madam Stolpe? Yes, if anyone can stand the air, by God, it’s Albert Olsen. Those big-nosed masons, what can they do?” He stood with bent head, muttering angrily to himself. “Yes, then we’ll take a walk in the fresh air. I don’t want to have anything to do with your fools’ tricks.” He staggered out through the kitchen door.</p>
			<p>“What’s he going to do there?” cried Madam Stolpe, in alarm.</p>
			<p>“Oh, he’ll just go down into the yard and turn himself inside out,” said Otto. “He’s a brilliant fellow, but he can’t carry much.”</p>
			<p>Pelle, still sitting at table, had been drawing with a pencil on a scrap of paper while the others were arguing. Ellen leaned over his shoulder watching him. He felt her warm breath upon his ear and smiled happily as he used his pencil. Ellen took the drawing when he had finished and pushed it across the table to the others. It showed a thickset figure of a man, dripping with sweat, pushing a wheelbarrow which supported his belly. “Capitalism⁠—when the rest of us refuse to serve him any longer!” was written below. This drawing made a great sensation. “You’re a deuce of a chap!” cried Stolpe. “I’ll send that to the editor of the humorous page⁠—I know him.”</p>
			<p>“Yes, Pelle,” said Lasse proudly, “there’s nothing he can’t do; devil knows where he gets it from, for he doesn’t get it from his father.” And they all laughed.</p>
			<p>Carpenter Stolpe’s good lady sat considering the drawing with amazement, quite bewildered, looking first at Pelle’s fingers and then at the drawing again. “I can understand how people can say funny things with their mouths,” she said, “but with their fingers⁠—that I don’t understand. Poor fellow, obliged to push his belly in front of him! It’s almost worse than when I was going to have Victor.”</p>
			<p>“Cousin Victor, her youngest, who is so deucedly clever,” said Otto, in explanation, giving Pelle a meaning wink.</p>
			<p>“Yes, indeed he is clever, if he is only six months old. The other day I took him downstairs with me when I went to buy some milk. Since then he won’t accept his mother’s left breast any more. The rascal noticed that the milkman drew skim milk from the left side of the cart and full-cream milk from the tap on the right side. And another time⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Now, mother, give over!” said Carpenter Stolpe; “don’t you see they’re sitting laughing at you? And we ought to see about getting home presently.” He looked a trifle injured.</p>
			<p>“What, are you going already?” said Stolpe. “Why, bless my soul, it’s quite late already. But we must have another song first.”</p>
			<p>“It’ll be daylight soon,” said Madam Stolpe; she was so tired that she was nodding.</p>
			<p>When they had sung the Socialist marching song, the party broke up. Lasse had his pockets filled with sweets for the three orphans.</p>
			<p>“What’s become of the Vanishing Man?” said Otto suddenly.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps he’s been taken bad down in the yard,” said Stolpe. “Run down and see, Frederick.” They had quite forgotten him.</p>
			<p>Frederik returned and announced that Albert Olsen was not in the yard⁠—and the gate was locked.</p>
			<p>“Surely he can’t have gone on the roof?” said one. They ran up the back stairs; the door of the loft was open, and the skylight also.</p>
			<p>Otto threw off his coat and swung himself up through the opening. On the extreme end of the ridge of the roof sat Albert Olsen, snoring.</p>
			<p>He was leaning against the edge of the party-wall, which projected upward about eighteen inches. Close behind him was empty space.</p>
			<p>“For God’s sake don’t call him,” said Mother Stolpe, under her breath; “and catch hold of him before he wakes.”</p>
			<p>But Otto went straight up to his comrade. “Hullo, mate! Time’s up!” he cried.</p>
			<p>“Righto!” said the Vanisher, and he rose to his feet. He stood there a moment, swaying above the abyss, then, giving the preference to the way leading over the roof, he followed in Otto’s track and crept through the window.</p>
			<p>“What the dickens were you really doing there?” asked Stolpe, laughing. “Have you been to work?”</p>
			<p>“I just went up there and enjoyed the fresh air a bit. Have you got a bottle of beer? But what’s this? Everybody going home already?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, you’ve been two hours sitting up there and squinting at the stars,” replied Otto.</p>
			<p>Now all the guests had gone. Lasse and the young couple stood waiting to say farewell. Madam Stolpe had tears in her eyes. She threw her arms round Ellen. “Take good care of yourself, the night is so cold,” she said, in a choking voice, and she stood nodding after them with eyes that were blinded with tears.</p>
			<p>“Why, but there’s nothing to cry about!” said Mason Stolpe, as he led her indoors. “Go to bed now⁠—I’ll soon sing the Vanishing Man to sleep! Thank God for today, mother!”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
