<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-4" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-4-6" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VI</h3>
				<p>Pelle was awake as early as four o’clock, although he had gone to bed late. He slept lightly at this time, when the summer night lay lightly upon his eyelids. He stole out into the kitchen and washed himself under the tap, and then went down to his work. The gray spirit of the night was still visible down in the street, but a tinge of red was appearing above the roofs. “The sun’s rising now over the country,” he thought, recalling the mornings of his childhood, the fields with their sheen of silvery dew, and the sun suddenly coming and changing them into thousands of sparkling diamond drops. Ah, if one could once more run bare-footed, if a little shrinkingly, out into the dewy grass, and shout a greeting to the dawning day: “Get up, Sun! Pelle is here already!” The night-watchman came slowly past the open window on his way home. “Up already?” he exclaimed in a voice hoarse with the night air, as he nodded down to Pelle. “Well, it’s the early bird that catches the worm! You’ll be rich one of these days, shoemaker!” Pelle laughed; he <em>was</em> rich!</p>
				<p>He thought of his wife and children while he worked. It was nice to think of them sleeping so securely while he sat here at work; it emphasized the fact that he was their bread-winner. With every blow of his hammer the home grew, so he hammered away cheerfully. They were poor, but that was nothing in comparison with the fact that if he were taken away now, things would go to pieces. He was the children’s Providence; it was always “Father’s going to,” or “Father said so.” In their eyes he was infallible. Ellen too began to come to him with her troubles; she no longer kept them to herself, but recognized that he had the broader back.</p>
				<p>It was all so undeserved⁠—as if good spirits were working for him. Shameful though it was that the wife should work to help to keep the family, he had not been able to exempt her from it. And what had he done for the children? It was not easy to build everything up at once from a bare foundation, and he was sometimes tempted to leave something alone so as to accomplish the rest the more quickly. As it was now, he was really nothing! Neither the old Pelle nor the new, but something indeterminate, in process of formation, something that was greatly in need of indulgence! A removing van full of furniture on its way to a new dwelling.</p>
				<p>He often enough had occasion to feel this from outside; both old enemies and old friends looked upon him as a man who had gone very much down in the world. Their look said: “Is that really all that remains of that stalwart fellow we once knew?” His own people, on the other hand, were lenient in their judgment. “Father hasn’t got time,” Sister would say in explanation to herself when she was playing about down in his work-room⁠—“but he will have some day!” And then she would picture to herself all the delightful things that would happen then. It affected Pelle strangely; he would try to get through this as quickly as possible.</p>
				<p>It was a dark and pathless continent into which he had ventured, but he was now beginning to find his way in it. There were ridges of hills that constantly repeated themselves, and a mountain-top here and there that was reached every time he emerged from the thicket. It was good to travel there. Perhaps it was the land he and the others had looked for. When he had got through, he would show it to them.</p>
				<p>Pelle had a good memory, and remembered all that he read. He could quote much of it verbatim, and in the morning, before the street had wakened, he used to go through it all in his mind while he worked. It surprised him to find how little history concerned itself with his people; it was only in quite recent times that they had been included. Well, that did not trouble him! The Movement <em>was</em> really something new, and not one of history’s everlasting repetitions. He now wanted to see its idea in print, and one day found him sitting with a strange solemnity in the library with Marx and Henry George in front of him. Pelle knew something about this subject too, but this was nevertheless like drawing up a net from the deep; a brilliant world of wonders came up with it. There were incontrovertible logical proofs that he had a right apprehension, though it had been arrived at blindly. The land of fortune was big enough for all; the greater the number that entered it, the larger did it become. He felt a desire to hit out again and strike a fresh blow for happiness!</p>
				<p>Suddenly an avalanche seemed to fall from the top to the bottom of the house, a brief, all-pervading storm that brought him back to his home. It was only Lasse Frederik ushering in the day; he took a flight at each leap, called a greeting down to his father, and dashed off to his work, buttoning the last button of his braces as he ran. A little later Ellen came down with coffee.</p>
				<p>“Why didn’t you call me when you got up?” she said sulkily. “It’s not good to sit working so long without having had something to eat.”</p>
				<p>Pelle laughed and kissed her good-morning. “Fine ladies don’t get up until long after their husbands,” he said teasingly.</p>
				<p>But Ellen would not be put off with a jest. A proper wife would be up before her husband and have something ready for him. “I <em>will</em> have you call me!” she said decidedly, her cheeks very red. It suited her to get roused now and then.</p>
				<p>While he drank his coffee, she sat and talked to him about her affairs, and they discussed the plans for the day, after which she went upstairs to help the children to dress.</p>
				<p>Later in the morning Pelle laid aside his work, dressed himself and went out to deliver it. While he was out he would go into the Library and look up something in the large dictionaries.</p>
				<p>The street lived its own quiet life here close up to the greater thoroughfares⁠—the same life day after day. The fat second-hand dealer from Jutland was standing as usual at his door, smoking his wooden pipe. “Good-morning, shoemaker!” he cried. A yellow, oblique-eyed oriental in slippers and long black caftan was balancing himself carelessly on the steps of the basement milk-shop with a bowl of cream in one hand and a loaf of bread in the other. Above on the pavement two boys were playing hopscotch, just below the large red lamp which all night long advertised its “corn-operator” right up to the main thoroughfare. Two girls in cycling costume came out of a gateway with their machines; they were going to the woods. “Good-day, Pelle! How is Ellen’s business getting on?” they asked familiarly. They were girls for whom she had washed.</p>
				<p>Pelle was fond of this busy part of the town where new shops with large plate-glass windows stood side by side with low-roofed cottages where retail business was carried on behind ordinary windows with wallflowers and dahlias in them as they might be in any provincial town. A string was stretched above the flower-pots, with a paper of safety-pins or a bundle of shoelaces hanging from it. There were poor people enough here, but life did not run in such hard grooves as out at Nörrebro. People took existence more easily; he thought them less honorable, but also less self-righteous. They seemed to be endowed with a more cheerful temperament, did not go so steadily and methodically to and from their fixed work, but, on the other hand, had several ways of making a living.</p>
				<p>There was everywhere a feeling of breaking up, which corresponded well with Pelle’s own condition; the uncertainty of life enveloped everything in a peculiarly tense atmosphere. Poverty did not come marching in close columns of workmen; its clothing was plentiful and varied; it might appear in the last woollen material from the big houses of old Copenhagen, or in gold-rimmed spectacles and high hat. Pelle thought he knew all the trades, but here there were hundreds of businesses that could not be organized; every day he discovered new and remarkable trades. He remembered how difficult it had been to organize out here; life was too incalculable.</p>
				<p>There was room here for everything; next door to one another lived people whom the Movement had not yet gathered in, and people who had been pushed up out of it in obstinate defiance. There was room here for him too; the shadow he had dreaded did not follow him. The people had seen too much of life to interfere in one another’s affairs; respectable citizenship had not been able to take possession of the poor man. There was something of the “Ark” about this part of the town, only not its hopelessness; on the contrary, all possibilities were to be found here. The poor man had conquered this ground from the rich citizens, and it seemed as if the development had got its direction from them. Here it was the proletariat whose varied nature forced its way upward, and leavened⁠—so to speak⁠—the whole. In the long side streets, which were full of second-hand dealers and pawnbrokers, existence had not resolved itself into its various constituents. Girls and gamblers were next-door neighbors to old, peaceable townsfolk, who lived soberly on the interest of their money, and went to church every Sunday with their hymn-books in their hands. The ironmonger had gold watches and antique articles among the lumber in his cellar.</p>
				<p>Pelle went along Vesterbro Street. The summer holidays were just over, and the pavement on the Figaro side was crowded with sunburnt people⁠—business-men, students and college girls⁠—who were conspicuous in the throng by their high spirits. They had just returned to town, and still had the scent of fresh breeze and shore about them: it was almost as good as a walk in the country. And if he wanted to go farther out into the world, he could do that too; there were figures enough in the Vesterbro neighborhood to arrest his fancy and carry him forth. It was like a quay on which people from all parts of the world had agreed to meet⁠—artists, seamen and international agents. Strange women came sailing through the crowd, large, exotic, like hot-house fruits; Pelle recognized them from the picture of the second-hand dealer’s daughter in the “Ark,” and knew that they belonged to the international nursing corps. They wore striped costumes, and their thick, fair hair emitted a perfume of foreign lands, of many ports and routes, like the interior of steamers; and their strong, placid faces were big with massage. They floated majestically down the current like full-rigged vessels. In their wake followed some energetic little beings who also belonged to the show, and had decked themselves out to look like children, with puffed sleeves, short skirts, and hair tied up with ribbons. Feeble old men, whom the sun had enticed out, stood in silent wonder, following the lovely children with their eyes.</p>
				<p>Pelle felt a peculiar pleasure in being carried along with this stream which flowed like life itself, broad and calm. The world was greater than he had thought, and he took no side for or against anything, but merely wondered over its variety.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>He came home from the library at two, with a large volume of statistics under his arm. Ellen received him with red eyes.</p>
				<p>“Have your lodgers been making things unpleasant for you again?” he asked, looking into her face. She turned her head away.</p>
				<p>“Did you get the money for your work?” she asked instead of answering.</p>
				<p>“No, the man wasn’t in the shop himself. They’re coming here to pay.”</p>
				<p>“Then we haven’t got a farthing, and I’ve got no dinner for you!” She tried to smile as she spoke, but her heavy eyelids quivered.</p>
				<p>“Is that all?” said Pelle, putting his arm round her. “Why didn’t you make me some porridge? I should have liked a good plateful of that.”</p>
				<p>“I have made it, but you’ll get hardly anything else, and that’s no food for a man.”</p>
				<p>He took her round the waist with both hands, lifted her up and put her carefully down upon the kitchen table. “That’s porridge, my dear!” he said merrily. “I can hardly walk, I’m so strong!”</p>
				<p>But there was no smile to be coaxed out of Ellen; something had happened that she did not want to tell him. At last he got out of her that the two musical clowns had gone off without paying. They had spoiled her good bed-clothes by lying in them with their clothes on, and had made them so filthy that nothing could be done with them. She was unwilling to tell Pelle, because he had once advised her against it; but all at once she gave in completely. “You mustn’t laugh at me!” she sobbed, hiding her face on his shoulder.</p>
				<p>Pelle attempted to comfort her, but it was not so easily done. It was not the one misfortune but the whole fiasco that had upset her so; she had promised herself so much from her great plan. “It isn’t all lost yet,” he said to comfort her. “We’ll just keep on and you’ll see it’ll be all right.”</p>
				<p>Ellen was not to be hoodwinked, however. “You know you don’t mean it,” she said angrily. “You only say it because of me! And the second-hand dealer sent up word this morning that if he didn’t soon get the rest of his money, he’d take all the furniture back again.”</p>
				<p>“Then let him take it, and that’ll be an end of the matter.”</p>
				<p>“But then we shall lose all that we’ve paid!” she exclaimed quickly, drying her eyes.</p>
				<p>Pelle shrugged his shoulders. “That can’t be helped.”</p>
				<p>“Wouldn’t it be better to get the things sold little by little? We only owe a third on them.”</p>
				<p>“We can’t do that; it’s punishable. We’ve got a contract for the hire of the furniture, and as long as we owe a farthing on it, it’s his. But we’re well and strong all of us; what does it matter?”</p>
				<p>“That’s true enough,” answered Ellen, trying to smile, “but the stronger we are, the more food we need.”</p>
				<p>A girl came running up with a pair of boots that were to be soled as quickly as possible. They were “Queen Theresa’s,” and she was going to wear them in the evening. “That’ll bring us in a few pence!” said Ellen, brightening. “I’ll help you to get them done quickly.”</p>
				<p>They seated themselves one on each side of the counter, and set to work. It reminded them of the early days of their married life. Now and then they stopped to laugh, when Ellen had forgotten some knack. In an hour and a half the boots were ready, and Pelle went himself with them to make sure of the money.</p>
				<p>“You’ll most likely find her in the tavern,” said Ellen. “The artistes generally have their dinner at this hour, and she’s probably there.”</p>
				<p>It was a busy time in the artistes’ restaurant. At the small tables sat bony, close-cropped men of a peculiar rubicund type, having dinner with some girl or other from the neighborhood. They were acrobats, clowns, and wrestlers, people of a homogeneous type, dressed in loud checks, with enormous cuffs and boots with almost armor-plated toes. They chewed well and looked up stupidly at the call of the girls; they wore a hard, brutal mask for a face, and big diamond rings on their fingers. Some of them had such a powerful lower jaw that they looked as if they had developed it for the purpose of taking blows in a boxing-match. In the adjoining room some elegant young men were playing billiards while they secretly kept an eye on what was going on at the tables. They had curls on their forehead, and patent leather shoes.</p>
				<p>“Queen Theresa” was not there, so Pelle went to Dannebrog Street, where she lived, but found she was not at home. He had to hand in the boots to a neighbor, and go back empty-handed.</p>
				<p>Well, it was no more than might have been expected. When you needed a thing most, chance played with you as a cat played with a mouse. Pelle was not nearly so cheerful as he appeared to be when he faced Ellen. The reality was beginning to affect him. He went out to Morten, but without any faith in the result; Morten had many uses for what he earned.</p>
				<p>“You’ve just come at the right moment!” said Morten, waving two notes in the air. “I’ve just had twenty krones sent me from <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The Working Man</i>, and we can divide them. It’s the first money I’ve got from that quarter, so of course I’ve spat upon it three times.”</p>
				<p>“Then they’ve found their way to you, after all!” exclaimed Pelle joyfully.</p>
				<p>Morten laughed. “I got tired of seeing my work repeated in their paper,” he said, “when they’ll have nothing to do with me up there; and I went up to them and drew their attention to the paragraph about piracy. You should have seen their expression! Goodness knows it’s not pleasant to have to earn your bread on wretchedness, so to speak, but it’s still more painful when afterward you have to beg for your hard-earned pence. You mustn’t think I should do it either under other circumstances; I’d sooner starve; but at any rate I won’t be sweated, by my own side! It’s a long time since you were here.”</p>
				<p>“I’ve been so busy. How’s Johanna?” The last words were spoken in a whisper.</p>
				<p>“Not well just now; she’s keeping her bed. She’s always asking after you.”</p>
				<p>“I’ve been very busy lately, and unfortunately I can’t find out anything about her. Is she just as cross?”</p>
				<p>“When she’s in a bad temper she lets me understand that she could easily help to put us on the right track if she wanted to. I think it amuses her to see us fooled.”</p>
				<p>“A child can’t be so knowing!”</p>
				<p>“Don’t be so sure of that! Remember she’s not a child; her experiences have been too terrible. I have an idea that she hates me and only meditates on the mischief she can do me. You can’t imagine how spiteful she can be; it’s as though the exhalations from down there had turned to poison in her. If any one comes here that she notices I like, she reviles them as soon as they’re gone, says some poisonous thing about them in order to wound me. You’re the only one she spares, so I think there must be some secret link between you. Try to press her on the subject once more.”</p>
				<p>They went in to her. As the door opened she slipped hastily down beneath the clothes⁠—she had been listening at the door⁠—and pretended to be asleep. Morten went back to his work and closed the door after him.</p>
				<p>“Well, Johanna,” said Pelle, seating himself on the edge of the bed. “I’ve got a message for you. Can you guess who it’s from?”</p>
				<p>“From grandmother!” she exclaimed, sitting up eagerly; but the next moment she was ashamed at having been outwitted, and crept down under the clothes, where she lay with compressed lips, and stole distrustful glances at Pelle. There was something in the glance and the carriage of her head that awakened dormant memories in him, but he could not fix them.</p>
				<p>“No, not grandmother,” he said. “By-the-bye, where is she now? I should like to speak to her. Couldn’t you go out to her with me when you get well?”</p>
				<p>She looked at him with sparkling eyes and a mocking expression. “Don’t you wish you may get it!” she answered.</p>
				<p>“Tell me where she lives, Johanna,” Pelle went on, taking her thin hand in his, “there’s a good girl!”</p>
				<p>“Oh, yes, at night!”</p>
				<p>Pelle frowned. “You must be very heartless, when you can leave your old grandmother and not even like others to help her. I’m certain she’s in want somewhere or other.”</p>
				<p>Johanna looked at him angrily. “I whipped her too,” she exclaimed malignantly, and then burst into a laugh at Pelle’s expression. “No, I didn’t really,” she said reassuringly. “I only took away her stick and hid her spectacles so that she couldn’t go out and fetch the cream. So she was obliged to send me, and I drank up all the cream and put water in the can. She couldn’t see it, so she scolded the milk people because they cheated.”</p>
				<p>“You’re making all this up, I think,” said Pelle uncertainly.</p>
				<p>“I picked the crumb out of the loaf too, and let her eat the crust,” Johanna continued with a nod.</p>
				<p>“Now stop that,” said Pelle, stroking her damp forehead. “I know quite well that I’ve offended you.”</p>
				<p>She pushed away his hand angrily. “Do you know what I wish?” she said suddenly. “I wish you were my father.”</p>
				<p>“Would you like me to be?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, for when you became quite poor and ill, I’d treat you just as well as I’ve treated grandmother.” She laughed a harsh laugh.</p>
				<p>“I’m certain you’ve only been kind to grandmother,” said Pelle gravely.</p>
				<p>She looked hard at him to see whether he meant this too, and then turned her face to the wall. He could see from the curve of her body that she was struggling to keep back her tears, and he tried to turn her round to him; but she stiffened herself.</p>
				<p>“I won’t live with grandmother!” she whispered emphatically, “I won’t!”</p>
				<p>“And yet you’re fond of her!”</p>
				<p>“No, I’m not! I can’t bear her! She told the woman next door that I was only in the way! It was that confounded child’s fault that she couldn’t get into the Home, she said; I heard her myself! And yet I went about and begged all the food for her. But then I left her!” She jerked the sentences out in a voice that was quite hoarse, and crumpled the sheet up in her hands.</p>
				<p>“But do tell me where she is!” said Pelle earnestly. “I promise you you shan’t go to her if you don’t want to.”</p>
				<p>The child kept a stubborn silence. She did not believe in promises.</p>
				<p>“Well, then, I must go to the police to find her, but I don’t want to do that.”</p>
				<p>“No, because you’ve been in prison!” she exclaimed, with a short laugh.</p>
				<p>A pained expression passed over Pelle’s face. “Do you think that’s so funny?” he said, winking his eyes fast. “I’m sure grandmother didn’t laugh at it.”</p>
				<p>Johanna turned half round. “No, she cried!” she said. “There was no one to give us food then, and so she cried.”</p>
				<p>It began to dawn upon him who she was. “What became of you two that day on the common? We were going to have dinner together,” he said.</p>
				<p>“When you were taken up? Oh, we couldn’t find you, so we just went home.” Her face was now quite uncovered, and she lay looking at him with her large gray eyes. It was Hanne’s look; behind it was the same wondering over life, but here was added to it a terrible knowledge. Suddenly her face changed; she discovered that she had been outwitted, and glared at him.</p>
				<p>“Is it true that you and mother were once sweethearts?” she suddenly asked mischievously.</p>
				<p>Pelle’s face flushed. The question had taken him by surprise. “I’ll tell you everything about your mother if you’ll tell me what you know,” he said, looking straight at her.</p>
				<p>“What is it you want to know?” she asked in a cross-questioning tone. “Are you going to write about me in the papers?”</p>
				<p>“My dear child, we must find your grandmother! She may be starving.”</p>
				<p>“I think she’s at the ‘Generality,’ ” said the child quietly. “I went there on Thursday when the old things had leave to go out and beg for a little coffee; and one day I saw her.”</p>
				<p>“Didn’t you go up to her then?”</p>
				<p>“No; I was tired of listening to her lamentations!”</p>
				<p>Johanna was no longer stiff and defiant. She lay with her face turned away and answered⁠—a little sullenly⁠—Pelle’s questions, while she played nervously with his fingers. Her brief answers made up for him one connected, sad story.</p>
				<p>Widow Johnsen was not worth much when once the “Ark” was burnt down. She felt old and helpless everywhere else, and when Pelle went to prison, she collapsed entirely. She and the little girl suffered want, and when Johanna felt herself in the way, she ran away to a place where she could be comfortable. Her grandmother had also been in her way. She had her mother’s whimsical, dreamy nature, and now she gave up everything and ran away to meet the wonderful. An older playfellow seduced her and took her out to the boys of the timber-yard. There she was left to take care of herself, often slept out in the open, and stole now and then, but soon learned to earn money for herself. When it became cold she went as scullery-maid to the inns or maid-of-all-work to the women in Dannebrog Street. Strange to say, she always eluded the police. At first there were two or three times when she started to return to her grandmother, but went no farther than the stairs; she was afraid of being punished, and could not endure the thought of having to listen to the old lady’s complaints. Later on she became accustomed to her new way of living, and no longer felt any desire to leave it, probably because she had begun to take strong drink. Now and again, however, she stole in to the Home and caught a glimpse of her grandmother. She could not explain why she did it, and firmly maintained that she could not endure her. The old woman’s unreasonable complaint that she was an encumbrance to her had eaten deeply into the child’s mind. During the last year she had been a waitress for some time at a sailors’ tavern down in Nyhavn with an innkeeper Elleby, the confidence-man who had fleeced Pelle on his first arrival in the city. It was Elleby’s custom to adopt young girls so as to evade the law and have women-servants for his sailors; and they generally died in the course of a year or two: he always wore a crape band round his sleeve. Johanna was also to have been adopted, but ran away in time.</p>
				<p>She slowly confessed it all to Pelle, coarse and horrible as it was, with the instinctive confidence that the inhabitants of the “Ark” had placed in him, and which had been inherited by her from her mother and grandmother. What an abyss of horrors! And he had been thinking that there was no hurry, that life was richer than that! But the children, the children! Were they to wait too, while he surveyed the varied forms of existence⁠—wait and go to ruin? Was there on the whole any need of knowledge and comprehensiveness of survey in order to fight for juster conditions? Was anything necessary beyond the state of being good? While he sat and read books, children were perhaps being trodden down by thousands. Did this also belong to life and require caution? For the first time he doubted himself.</p>
				<p>“Now you must lie down and go to sleep,” he said gently, and stroked her forehead. It was burning hot and throbbed, and alarmed he felt her pulse. Her hand dropped into his, thin and worn, and her pulse was irregular. Alas, Hanne’s fever was raging within her!</p>
				<p>She held his hand tight when he rose to go. “Were you and mother sweethearts, then?” she asked in a whisper, with a look of expectation in the bright eyes that she fixed upon him. And suddenly he understood the reiterated question and all her strange compliance with his wishes.</p>
				<p>For a moment he looked waveringly into her expectant eyes. Then he nodded slowly. “Yes, Johanna; you’re my little daughter!” he said, bending down over her. Her pale face was lighted with a faint smile, and she shyly touched his stubbly chin and then turned over to go to sleep.</p>
				<p>In a few words Pelle told Morten the child’s previous history⁠—Madam Johnsen and her husband’s vain fight to get on, his horrible death in the sewer, how Hanne had grown up as the beautiful princess of the “Ark”⁠—Hanne who meant to have happiness, and had instead this poor child!</p>
				<p>“You’ve never told me anything about Hanne,” said Morten, looking at him.</p>
				<p>“No,” said Pelle slowly. “She was always so strangely unreal to me, like an all too beautiful dream. Do you know she danced herself to death! But you must pretend to the child that I’m her father.”</p>
				<p>Morten nodded. “You might go out to the Home for me, and hear about the old lady. It’s a pity she should have to spend her old age there!” He looked round the room.</p>
				<p>“You can’t have her here, however,” said Pelle.</p>
				<p>“It might perhaps be arranged. She and the child belong to one another.”</p>
				<p>Pelle first went home to Ellen with the money and then out to the Home.</p>
				<p>Madam Johnsen was in the infirmary, and could not live many days. It was a little while before she recognized Pelle, and she seemed to have forgotten the past. It made no impression whatever on her when he told her that her grandchild had been found. She lay most of the time, talking unintelligibly; she thought she still had to get money for the rent and for food for herself and the child. The troubles of old age had made an indelible impression upon her. “She gets no pleasure out of lying here and being comfortable,” said an old woman who lay in the next bed to hers. “She’s always trying and trying to get things, and when she’s free of that, she goes to Jutland.”</p>
				<p>At the sound of the last word, Madam Johnsen fixed her eyes upon Pelle. “I should so like to see Jutland again before I die,” she said. “Ever since I came over here in my young days, I’ve always meant to use the first money I had over on an excursion home; but I never managed it. Hanne’s child had to live too, and they eat a lot at her age.” And so she was back in her troubles again.</p>
				<p>The nurse came and told Pelle that he must go now, and he rose and bent over the old woman to say farewell, strangely moved at the thought that she had done so much for him, and now scarcely knew him. She felt for his hand and held it in both hers like a blind person trying to recognize, and she looked at him with her expressionless eyes that were already dimmed by approaching death. “You still have a good hand,” she said slowly, with the far-sounding voice of old age. “Hanne should have taken you, and then things would have been very different.’ ”</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
