<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-2" id="chapter-2-16" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</h3>
			<p>Things were not going well in the brothers’ home. Jörgensen had done nothing with his plans. He was the only person who had not known that such would be the case. The people knew, too, on very good authority, that the engineer had offered him a hundred kroner for them, and as he would not take them, but demanded a share in the undertaking and the honor of executing it, he was shown to the door.</p>
			<p>He had never before taken anything so quietly. He did not burst out roaring with violent words; he simply betook himself to his usual day-laborer’s work in the harbor, like any other worker. He did not mention his defeat, and allowed no one else to do so. He treated his wife as though she did not exist. But she had to watch him wrap himself up in silence, without knowing what was going on in his mind. She had a foreboding of something terrible, and spoke of her trouble to the boys. He made no scenes, although now and again he got drunk; he ate in silence and went to bed. When he was not working, he slept.</p>
			<p>But as he himself had so far revealed his plans that they were known to all, it was all up with his work. The engineer had taken from Jörgensen’s plans as much as he could use⁠—everyone could see that⁠—and now the “Great Power” stood with his mouth empty, simply because he had put more in his spoon than his mouth would hold. Most people were far from envying his position, and they took plenty of time to talk about it; the town was quite accustomed to neglect its own affairs in order to throw its whole weight on his obstinate back. But now he was down in the dust all had been to the harbor to watch the “Great Power” working there⁠—to see him, as a common laborer, carting the earth for his own wonderful scheme. They marvelled only that he took it all so quietly; it was to some extent a disappointment that he did not flinch under the weight of his burden and break out into impotent raving.</p>
			<p>He contented himself with drinking; but that he did thoroughly. He went about it as it were in the midst of a cloud of alcoholic vapor, and worked only just enough to enable him to go on drinking. “He has never yet been like this,” said his wife, weeping. “He doesn’t storm and rage, but he is angry all the time so that one can’t bear him at home any longer. He breaks everything in his anger, and he scolds poor Karen so that it’s wretched. He has no regard for anybody, only for his old mother, and God knows how long that will last. He doesn’t work, he only drinks. He steals my hard-earned money out of my dress-pocket and buys brandy with it. He has no shame left in him, although he always used to be so honorable in his way of life. And he can’t stand his boozing as he used to; he’s always falling about and staggering. Lately he came home all bloody⁠—he’d knocked a hole in his head. What have we ever done to the dear God that he should punish us like this?”</p>
			<p>The old woman said nothing, but let her glance sweep from one to the other, and thought her own thoughts.</p>
			<p>So it went on, week after week. The boys became weary of listening to their mother’s complaints, and kept away from home.</p>
			<p>One day, when Karen had been sent on an errand for her mother, she did not return. Neither had she returned on the following day. Pelle heard of it down at the boat-harbor, where she had last been seen. They were dragging the water with nets in the hope of finding her, but no one dared tell Jörgensen. On the following afternoon they brought her to the workshop; Pelle knew what it was when he heard the many heavy footsteps out in the street. She lay on a stretcher, and two men carried her; before her the autumn wind whirled the first falling leaves, and her thin arms were hanging down to the pavement, as though she sought to find a hold there. Her disordered hair was hanging, too, and the water was dripping from her. Behind the stretcher came the “Great Power.” He was drunk. He held one hand before his eyes, and murmured as though in thought, and at every moment he raised his forefinger in the air. “She has found peace,” he said thickly, trying to look intelligent.</p>
			<p>“Peace⁠—the higher it is⁠—” He could not find the word he wanted.</p>
			<p>Jens and Pelle replaced the men at the stretcher, and bore it home. They were afraid of what was before them. But the mother stood at the door and received them silently, as though she had expected them; she was merely pale. “She couldn’t bear it!” she whispered to them, and she kneeled down beside the child.</p>
			<p>She laid her head on the little crippled body, and whispered indistinctly; now and again she pressed the child’s fingers into her mouth, in order to stifle her sobs. “And you were to have run an errand for mother,” she said, and she shook her head, smilingly. “You are a nice sort of girl to me⁠—not to be able to buy me two skeins of thread; and the money I gave you for it⁠—have you thrown it away?” Her words came between smiles and sobs, and they sounded like a slow lament. “Did you throw the money away? It doesn’t matter⁠—it wasn’t your fault. Dear child, dear little one!” Then her strength gave way. Her firmly closed mouth broke open, and closed again, and so she went on, her head rocking to and fro, while her hands felt eagerly in the child’s pocket. “Didn’t you run that errand for mother?” she moaned. She felt, in the midst of her grief, the need of some sort of corroboration, even if it referred to something quite indifferent. And she felt in the child’s purse. There lay a few öre and a scrap of paper.</p>
			<p>Then she suddenly stood up. Her face was terribly hard as she turned to her husband, who stood against the wall, swaying to and fro. “Peter!” she cried in agony, “Peter! Don’t you know what you have done? ‘Forgive me, mother,’ it says here, and she has taken four öre of the thirteen to buy sugar-candy. Look here, her hand is still quite sticky.” She opened the clenched hand, which was closed upon a scrap of sticky paper. “Ah, the poor persecuted child! She wanted to sweeten her existence with four öre worth of sugar-candy, and then into the water! A child has so much pleasure at home here! ‘Forgive me, mother!’ she says, as though she had done something wrong. And everything she did was wrong; so she had to go away. Karen! Karen! I’m not angry with you⁠—you were very welcome⁠—what do they signify, those few öre! I didn’t mean it like that when I reproached you for hanging about at home! But I didn’t know what to do⁠—we had nothing to eat. And he spent the little money there was!” She turned her face from the body to the father and pointed to him. It was the first time that the wife of the “Great Power” had ever turned upon him accusingly. But he did not understand her. “She has found peace,” he murmured, and attempted to pull himself up a little; “the peace of⁠—” But here the old woman rose in the chimney-corner⁠—until this moment she had not moved. “Be silent!” she said harshly, setting her stick at his breast, “or your old mother will curse the day when she brought you into the world.” Wondering, he stared at her; and a light seemed to shine through the mist as he gazed. For a time he still stood there, unable to tear his eyes from the body. He looked as though he wished to throw himself down beside his wife, who once more lay bowed above the bier, whispering. Then, with hanging head, he went upstairs and lay down.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
