<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-3" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-3-25" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXV</h3>
				<p>The “Ark” was now freezing in the north wind; all outward signs of life were stripped from it. The sounds that in summer bubbled up from its deep well-like shaft were silent now; the indistinguishable dripping of a hundred waste-pipes, that turned the court into a little well with green slimy walls, was silent too. The frost had fitted them all with stoppers; and where the toads had sat gorging themselves in the cavities of the walls⁠—fantastic caverns of green moss and slimy filaments⁠—a crust of ice hung over all; a grimy glacier, which extended from the attics right down to the floor of the court.</p>
				<p>Where were they now, the grimy, joyful children? And what of the evening carouse of the hearse-driver, for which his wife would soundly thrash him? And the quarrelsome women’s voices, which would suddenly break out over this or that railing, criticizing the whole court, sharp as so many razors?</p>
				<p>The frost was harder than ever! It had swept all these things away and had locked them up as closely as might be. The hurdy-gurdy man lay down below in his cellar, and had as visitor that good friend of the north wind, the gout; and down in the deserted court the draught went shuffling along the dripping walls. Whenever anyone entered the tunnel-entry the draught clutched at his knees with icy fingers, so that the pain penetrated to the very heart.</p>
				<p>There stood the old barrack, staring emptily out of its black windows. The cold had stripped away the last shred of figured curtain, and sent it packing to the pawnshop. It had exchanged the canary for a score of firewood, and had put a stop to the daylong, lonely crying of the little children behind the locked doors⁠—that hymn of labor, which had ceased only in the evening, when the mothers returned from the factories. Now the mothers sat with their children all day long, and no one but the cold grudged them this delight. But the cold and its sister, hunger, came every day to look in upon them.</p>
				<p>On the third floor, away from the court, Widow Johnsen sat in the corner by the stove. Hanne’s little girl lay cowering on the floor, on a tattered patchwork counterpane. Through the naked window one saw only ice, as though the atmosphere were frozen down to the ground. Transparent spots had formed on the windowpanes every time the child had breathed on them in order to look out, but they had soon closed up again. The old woman sat staring straight into the stove with big, round eyes; her little head quivered continually; she was like a bird of ill omen, that knew a great deal more than anyone could bear to hear.</p>
				<p>“Now I’m cold again, grandmother,” said the child quietly.</p>
				<p>“Don’t keep from shivering, then you’ll be warm,” said the old woman.</p>
				<p>“Are you shivering?”</p>
				<p>“No, I’m too old and stiff for it⁠—I can’t shiver any more. But the cold numbs my limbs, so that I can’t feel them. I could manage well enough if it wasn’t for my back.”</p>
				<p>“You lean your back against the cold stove too!”</p>
				<p>“Yes, the cold grips my poor back so.”</p>
				<p>“But that’s stupid, when the stove isn’t going.”</p>
				<p>“But if only my back would get numb too!” said the old woman piteously.</p>
				<p>The child was silent, and turned her head away.</p>
				<p>Over the whole of the wall were tiny glittering crystals. Now and again there was a rustling sound under the wallpaper.</p>
				<p>“Grandmother, what’s that funny noise?” asked the child.</p>
				<p>“That’s the bugs⁠—they are coming down,” said the old woman. “It’s too cold for them up there in the attics, and they don’t like it here. You should see them; they go to Olsen’s with the warm wall; they stay there in the cold.”</p>
				<p>“Is the wall at Olsen’s always warm, then?”</p>
				<p>“Yes, when there’s fire in the boiler of the steam mill.”</p>
				<p>Then the child was silent a while, wearily turning her head from side to side. A dreadful weariness was stamped on her face. “I’m cold,” she complained after a time.</p>
				<p>“See if you can’t shiver!”</p>
				<p>“Hadn’t I better jump a bit?”</p>
				<p>“No, then you’d just swallow down the cold⁠—the air is like ice. Just keep still, and soon mother will be here, and she’ll bring something!”</p>
				<p>“She never gets anything,” said the child. “When she gets there it’s always all over.”</p>
				<p>“That’s not true,” said Madam Johnsen severely. “There’s food enough in the soup kitchens for all; it’s just a matter of understanding how to go about it. The poor must get shame out of their heads. She’ll bring something today!”</p>
				<p>The child stood up and breathed a hole in the ice on the windowpane.</p>
				<p>“Look now, whether it isn’t going to snow a little so that the poor man can get yet another day’s employment,” said the old woman.</p>
				<p>No, the wind was still blowing from the north, although it commonly shuffled along the canal; but now, week after week, it blew from the Nicolai tower, and played the flute on the hollow bones of poverty. The canals were covered with ice, and the ground looked horribly hard. The naked frost chased the people across it like withered leaves. With a thin rustling sound they were swept across the bridges and disappeared.</p>
				<p>A great yellow van came driving by. The huge gates of the prison opened slowly and swallowed it. It was the van containing the meat for the prisoners. The child followed it with a desolate expression.</p>
				<p>“Mother isn’t coming,” she said. “I am so hungry.”</p>
				<p>“She will soon come⁠—you just wait! And don’t stand in the light there; come here in the corner! The light strikes the cold right through one.”</p>
				<p>“But I feel colder in the dark.”</p>
				<p>“That’s just because you don’t understand. I only long now for the pitch darkness.”</p>
				<p>“I long for the sun!” retorted the child defiantly.</p>
				<p>There was a creaking of timber out in the yard. The child ran out and opened the door leading to the gallery. It was only the people opposite, who were tearing a step away.</p>
				<p>But then came mother, with a tin pail in her hand, and a bundle under her arm; and there was something in the pail⁠—it looked heavy. Tra-la-la! And the bundle, the bundle! What was in that? “Mother, mother!” she cried shrilly, leaning far over the rickety rail.</p>
				<p>Hanne came swiftly up the stairs, with open mouth and red cheeks; and a face peeped out of every little nest.</p>
				<p>“Now Widow Hanne has taken the plunge,” they said. They knew what a point of honor it had been with her to look after her mother and her child unaided. She was a good girl.</p>
				<p>And Widow Hanne nodded to them all, as much as to say, “Now it’s done, thank God!”</p>
				<p>She stood leaning over the table, and lifted the cover off the pail. “Look!” she said, as she stirred the soup with a ladle: “there’s pearl barley and potherbs. If only we had something we could warm it up with!”</p>
				<p>“We can tear away a bit of the woodwork like other people,” said the mother.</p>
				<p>“Yes,” replied Hanne breathlessly, “yes, why not? If one can beg one can do that!”</p>
				<p>She ran out onto the gallery and tore away a few bits of trellis, so that the sound reechoed through the court. People watched her out of all the dark windows. Widow Hanne had knocked off the head of her pride!</p>
				<p>Then they sat down to their soup, the old woman and the child. “Eat!” said Hanne, standing over them and looking on with glowing eyes. Her cheeks were burning. “You look like a flower in the cold!” said her mother. “But eat, yourself, or you’ll starve to death.”</p>
				<p>No, Hanne would not eat. “I feel so light,” she said, “I don’t need any food.” She stood there fingering her bundle; all her features were quivering, and her mouth was like that of a person sick of a fever.</p>
				<p>“What have you there?” asked Madam Johnsen.</p>
				<p>“Clothes for you and little Marie. You were so cold. I got them downstairs from the old clothes woman⁠—they were so cheap.”</p>
				<p>“Do you say you bought them?”</p>
				<p>“Yes⁠—I got them on credit.”</p>
				<p>“Well, well, if you haven’t given too much for them! But it will do one good to have something warm on one’s back!”</p>
				<p>Hanne undid the bundle, while the others looked on in suspense. A light summer dress made its appearance, pleated and low-necked, blue as little Marie’s eyes, and a pair of thin kid shoes. The child and the old woman gazed wonderingly at the dress. “How fine!” they said. They had forgotten everything, and were all admiration. But Hanne stood staring with horror, and suddenly burst into sobs.</p>
				<p>“Come, come, Hanne!” said her mother, clapping her on the back. “You have bought a dress for yourself⁠—that’s not so dreadful! Youth will have its rights.”</p>
				<p>“No, mother, no, I didn’t buy it at all! I knew you both needed something to keep you warm, so I went into a fine house and asked if they hadn’t any cast-off things, and there was a young lady⁠—she gave me this⁠—and she was so kind. No, I didn’t know at all what was in the bundle⁠—I really didn’t know, dear mother!”</p>
				<p>“Well, well, they are fine enough!” said the old woman, spreading the dress out in front of her. “They are fine things!” But Hanne put the things together and threw them into the corner by the stove.</p>
				<p>“You are ill!” said her mother, gazing at her searchingly; “your eyes are blazing like fire.”</p>
				<p>The darkness descended, and they went to bed. People burned no useless lights in those days, and it was certainly best to be in bed. They had laid the featherbed over themselves crosswise, when it comfortably covered all three; their daytime clothes they laid over their feet. Little Marie lay in the middle. No harm could come to her there. They talked at random about indifferent matters. Hanne’s voice sounded loud and cheerful in the darkness as though it came from a radiant countryside.</p>
				<p>“You are so restless,” said the mother. “Won’t you try to sleep a little? I can feel the burning in you from here!”</p>
				<p>“I feel so light,” replied Hanne; “I can’t lie still.” But she did lie still, gazing into space and humming inaudibly to herself, while the fever raged in her veins.</p>
				<p>After a time the old woman awoke; she was cold. Hanne was standing in the middle of the room, with open mouth; and was engaged in putting on her fine linen underclothing by the light of a candle-end.</p>
				<p>Her breath came in short gasps and hung white on the air.</p>
				<p>“Are you standing there naked in the cold?” said Madam Johnsen reproachfully. “You ought to take a little care of yourself.”</p>
				<p>“Why, mother, I’m so warm! Why, it’s summer now!”</p>
				<p>“What are you doing, child?”</p>
				<p>“I am only making myself a little bit smart, mother dear!”</p>
				<p>“Yes, yes⁠—dance, my baby. You’ve still got the best of your youth before you, poor child! Why didn’t you get a husband where you got the child from?”</p>
				<p>Hanne only hummed a tune to herself, and proceeded to don the bright blue summer costume. It was a little full across the chest, but the decolletage sat snugly over her uncovered bosom. A faint cloud of vapor surrounded her person like a summer haze.</p>
				<p>Her mother had to hook up the dress at the back. “If only we don’t wake Marie!” she whispered, entirely absorbed by the dress. “And the fine lace on the chemise⁠—you can always let that peep out of the dress a little⁠—it looks so pretty like that. Now you really look like a summer girl!”</p>
				<p>“I’ll just run down and show it to Madam Olsen,” said Hanne, pressing her hand to her glowing cheeks.</p>
				<p>“Yes, do⁠—poor folks’ joys must have their due,” replied the old woman, turning over to the wall.</p>
				<p>Hanne ran down the steps and across the yard and out into the street. The ground was hard and ringing in the frost, the cold was angry and biting, but the road seemed to burn Hanne through her thin shoes. She ran through the market, across the bridge, and into the less crowded quarter of the city⁠—right into Pelle’s arms. He was just going to see Father Lasse.</p>
				<p>Pelle was wearied and stupefied with the continual battle with hard reality. The bottomless depths of misery were beginning to waste his courage. Was it really of any use to hold the many together? It only made the torture yet harder for them to bear. But in a moment everything looked as bright as though he had fallen into a state of ecstasy, as had often happened lately. In the midst of the sternest realities it would suddenly happen that his soul would leap within him and conjure up the new age of happiness before his eyes, and the terrible dearth filled his arms to overflowing with abundance! He did not feel the cold; the great dearth had no existence; violent spiritual excitement and insufficient nourishment made the blood sing continually in his ears. He accepted it as a happy music from a contented world. It did not surprise him that he should meet Hanne in summer clothing and attired as for a ball.</p>
				<p>“Pelle, my protector!” she said, grasping his hand. “Will you go to the dance with me?”</p>
				<p>“That’s really the old Hanne,” thought Pelle delightedly⁠—“the careless Princess of the ‘Ark,’ and she is feverish, just as she used to be then.” He himself was in a fever. When their eyes met they emitted a curious, cold, sparkling light. He had quite forgotten Father Lasse and his errand, and went with Hanne.</p>
				<p>The entrance of “The Seventh Heaven” was flooded with light, which exposed the merciless cold of the street. Outside, in the sea of light, thronged the children of the terrible winter, dishevelled and perishing with the cold. They stood there shuddering, or felt in their pockets for a five-öre piece, and if they found it they slipped through the blood-red tunnel into the dancing-hall.</p>
				<p>But it was cold in there too; their breath hung like white powder on the air; and crystals of ice glittered on the polished floor. Who would dream of heating a room where the joy of life was burning? and a thousand candles? Here carelessness was wont to give of its abundance, so that the lofty room lay in a cloud and the musicians were bathed in sweat.</p>
				<p>But now the cold had put an end to that. Unemployed workers lounged about the tables, disinclined for movement. Winter had not left the poor fellows an ounce of frivolity. Cerberus Olsen might spare himself the trouble of going round with his giant arms outspread, driving the two or three couples of dancers with their five-öre pieces indoors toward the music, as though they had been a whole crowd. People only toiled across the floor in order to have the right to remain there. Good Lord! Some of them had rings and watches, and Cerberus had ready cash⁠—what sort of dearth was that? The men sat under the painted ceiling and the gilded mirrors, over a glass of beer, leaving the girls to freeze⁠—even Elvira had to sit still. “Mazurka!” bellowed Cerberus, going threateningly from table to table. They slunk into the hall like beaten curs, dejectedly danced once round the floor, and paid.</p>
				<p>But what is this? Is it not Summer herself stepping into the hall? All glowing and lightly clad in the blue of forget-me-nots, with a rose in her fair hair? Warmth lies like fleeting summer upon her bare shoulders, although she has come straight out of the terrible winter, and she steps with boldly moving limbs, like a daughter of joy. How proudly she carries her bosom, as though she were the bride of fortune⁠—and how she burns! Who is she? Can no one say?</p>
				<p>Oh, that is Widow Hanne, a respectable girl, who for seven long years faithfully trod her way to and from the factory, in order to keep her old mother and her child!</p>
				<p>But how comes it then that she has the discreet Pelle on her arm? He who has sold his own youth to the devil, in order to alleviate poverty? What does he want here on the dancing-floor? And Hanne, whence did she get her finery? She is still out of employment! And how in all the world has she grown so beautiful?</p>
				<p>They whisper behind her, following her as she advances; and in the midst of the hall she stands still and smiles. Her eyes burn with a volcanic fire. A young man rushes forward and encircles her with his arm. A dance with Hanne! A dance with Hanne!</p>
				<p>Hanne dances with a peculiar hesitation, as though her joy had brought her from far away. Heavily, softly, she weighs on the arms of her partners, and the warmth rises from her bare bosom and dispels the cold of the terrible winter. It is as though she were on fire! Who could fail to be warmed by her?</p>
				<p>Now the room is warm once more. Hanne is like a blazing meteor that kindles all as it circles round; where she glides past the fire springs up and the blood runs warmly in the veins. They overturn the chairs in their eagerness to dance with her. “Hi, steward! Five kroner on my watch⁠—only be quick!”⁠—“Ach, Hanne, a dance with me!”⁠—“Do you remember we were at the factory together?”⁠—“We used to go to school together!”</p>
				<p>Hanne does not reply, but she leaves Pelle and lays her naked arm upon their shoulders, and if they touch it with their cheeks the fire streams through them. They do not want to let her go again; they hold her fast embraced, gliding along with her to where the musicians are sitting, where all have to pay. No word passes her lips, but the fire within her is a promise to each of them, a promise of things most precious. “May I see you home tonight?” they whisper, hanging on her silent lips.</p>
				<p>But to Pelle she speaks as they glide along. “Pelle, how strong you are! Why have you never taken me? Do you love me?” Her hand is clasping his shoulder as she whirls along beside him. Her breath burns in his ear.</p>
				<p>“I don’t know!” he says uneasily. “But stop now⁠—you are ill.”</p>
				<p>“Hold me like that! Why have you never been stronger than I? Do you want me, Pelle? I’ll be yours!”</p>
				<p>Pelle shakes his head. “No, I love you only like a sister now.”</p>
				<p>“And now I love you! Look⁠—you are so distant to me⁠—I don’t understand you⁠—and your hand is as hard as if you came from another world! You are heavy, Pelle! Have you brought me happiness from a foreign land with you?”</p>
				<p>“Hanne, you are ill! Stop now and let me take you home!”</p>
				<p>“Pelle, you were not the right one. What is there strange about you? Nothing! So let me alone⁠—I am going to dance with the others as well!”</p>
				<p>Hitherto Hanne has been dancing without intermission. The men stand waiting for her; when one releases her ten spring forward, and this evening Hanne wants to dance with them all. Every one of them should be permitted to warm himself by her! Her eyes are like sparks in the darkness; her silent demeanor excites them; they swing her round more and more wildly. Those who cannot dance with her must slake the fire within them with drink. The terrible winter is put to flight, and it is warm as in Hell itself. The blood is seething in their brains; it injects the whites of their eyes, and expresses itself in wanton frolic, in a need to dance till they drop, or to fight.</p>
				<p>“Hanne is wild tonight⁠—she has got her second youth,” says Elvira and the other girls maliciously.</p>
				<p>Hold your tongues. No one shall criticize Hanne’s behavior! It is wonderful to touch her; the touch of her skin hurts one, as though she was not flesh and blood, but fire from Heaven! They say she has not had a bite of food for a week. The old woman and the child have had all there was. And yet she is burning! And see, she has now been dancing without a break for two whole hours! Can one understand such a thing? Hanne dances like a messenger from another world, where fire, not cold, is the condition of life. Every dancer leaves his partner in the lurch as soon as she is free! How lightly she dances! Dancing with her, one soars upward, far away from the cold. One forgets all misery in her eyes.</p>
				<p>But she has grown paler and paler; she is dancing the fire out of her body while others are dancing it in! Now she is quite white, and Olsen’s Elvira comes up and tugs at her dress, with anxiety in her glance. “Hanne, Hanne!” But Hanne does not see her; she is only longing for the next pair of arms⁠—her eyes are closed. She has so much to make up for! And who so innocent as she? She does not once realize that she is robbing others of their pleasure. Is she suffering from vertigo or <abbr>St.</abbr> Vitus’s dance, in her widowhood?</p>
				<p>Hold your tongue! How beautiful she is! Now she is growing rosy again, and opening her eyes. Fire darts from them; she has brought Pelle out of his corner and is whispering something to him, blushing as she does so; perhaps that precious promise that hitherto no one has been able to draw from her. Pelle must always be the lucky man!</p>
				<p>“Pelle, why don’t you dance with me oftener? Why do you sit in the corner there always and sulk? Are you angry with me as you used to be, and why are you so hard and cold? And your clothes are quite stiff!”</p>
				<p>“I come from outside all this⁠—from the terrible winter, Hanne, where the children are crying for bread, and the women dying of starvation, and the men go about with idle hands and look on the ground because they are ashamed of their unemployment!”</p>
				<p>“But why? It is still summer. Only look how cheerful everyone is! Take me, then, Pelle!”</p>
				<p>Hanne grows red, redder than blood, and leans her head on his shoulder. Only see how she surrenders herself, blissful in her unashamed ecstasy! She droops backward in his arms, and from between her lips springs a great rose of blood, that gushes down over the summer-blue dress.</p>
				<p>Fastened to the spot by his terrible burden, Pelle stands there unable to move. He can only gaze at Hanne, until Cerberus takes her in his giant’s arms and bears her out. She is so light in her summer finery⁠—she weighs nothing at all!</p>
				<p>“Mazurka!” he bellows, as he returns, and goes commandingly along the ranks of dancers.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
