<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="part-2" epub:type="part">
			<section id="chapter-2-7" epub:type="chapter">
				<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">VII</h3>
				<p>On Saturday afternoon Pelle was busily sweeping the street. It was getting on for evening; in the little houses there was already a fire in the grate; one could hear it crackling at Builder Rasmussen’s and Swedish Anders’, and the smell of broiled herrings filled the street. The women were preparing something extra good in order to wheedle their husbands when they came home with the week’s wages. Then they ran across to the huckster’s for schnaps and beer, leaving the door wide open behind them; there was just half a minute to spare while the herring was getting cooked on the one side! And now Pelle sniffed it afar off⁠—Madame Rasmussen was tattling away to the huckster, and a voice screeched after her: “Madame Rasmussen! Your herring is burning!” Now she came rushing back, turning her head confusedly from house to house as she scampered across the street and into her house. The blue smoke drifted down among the houses; the sun fell lower and filled the street with gold-dust.</p>
				<p>There were people sweeping all along the street; Baker Jörgen, the washerwoman, and the Comptroller’s maid-servant. The heavy boughs of the mulberry-tree across the road drooped over the wall and offered their last ripe fruits to whomsoever would pick them. On the other side of the wall the rich merchant Hans⁠—he who married the nurse-maid⁠—was pottering about his garden. He never came out, and the rumor ran that he was held a prisoner by his wife and her kin. But Pelle had leaned his ear against the wall, and had heard a stammering old voice repeating the same pet names, so that it sounded like one of those love-songs that never come to an end; and when in the twilight he slipped out of his attic window and climbed on to the ridge of the roof, in order to take a look at the world, he had seen a tiny little white-haired man walking down there in the garden, with his arm round the waist of a woman younger than himself. They were like a couple of young lovers, and they had to stop every other moment in order to caress one another. The most monstrous things were said of him and his money; of his fortune, that once upon a time was founded on a paper of pins, and was now so great that some curse must rest upon it.</p>
				<p>From the baker’s house the baker’s son came slinking hymn-book in hand. He fled across to the shelter of the wall, and hurried off; old Jörgen stood there gobbling with laughter as he watched him, his hands folded over his broomstick.</p>
				<p>“O Lord, is that a man?” he cried to Jeppe, who sat at his window, shaving himself before the milk-can. “Just look how he puffs! Now he’ll go in and beg God to forgive him for going courting!”</p>
				<p>Jeppe came to the window to see and to silence him; one could hear Brother Jörgen’s falsetto voice right down the street. “Has he been courting? However did you get him to venture such a leap?” he asked eagerly.</p>
				<p>“Oh, it was while we were sitting at table. I had a tussle with my melancholy madman⁠—because I couldn’t help thinking of the little Jörgen. God knows, I told myself, no little Jörgen has come to carry on your name, and the boy’s a weakling, and you’ve no one else to build on! It’s all very well going about with your nose in the air all the days God gives you⁠—everything will be swept away and be to no purpose. And everything of that sort⁠—you know how I get thinking when ideas like that get the upper hand with me. I sat there and looked at the boy, and angry I felt with him, that I did; and right opposite him there was sitting a fine bit of womanhood, and he not looking at her. And with that I struck my hand on the table, and I says, ‘Now, boy, just you take Marie by the hand and ask her whether she’ll be your wife⁠—I want to make an end of the matter now and see what you’re good for!’ The boy all shrivels up and holds out his hand, and Marie, it don’t come amiss to her. ‘Yes, that I will!’ she says, and grips hold of him before he has time to think what he’s doing. And we shall be having the marriage soon.”</p>
				<p>“If you can make a boot out of that leather!” said Jeppe.</p>
				<p>“Oh, she’s a warm piece⁠—look at the way she’s built. She’s thawing him already. Women, they know the way⁠—he won’t freeze in bed.”</p>
				<p>Old Jörgen laughed contentedly, and went off to his work. “Yes, why, she’d breathe life into the dead,” he announced to the street at large.</p>
				<p>The others went out in their finest clothes, but Pelle did not care to go. He had not been able to accomplish his constant resolution to keep himself neat and clean, and this failure weighed upon him and abashed him. And the holes in his stockings, which were now so big that they could no longer be darned, were disgustingly apparent, with his skin showing through them, so that he had a loathing for himself.</p>
				<p>Now all the young people were going out. He could see the sea in the opening at the end of the street; it was perfectly calm, and had borrowed the colors of the sunset. They would be going to the harbor or the dunes by the sea; there would be dancing on the grass, and perhaps some would get to fighting about a girl. But he wasn’t going to be driven out of the pack like a mangy dog; he didn’t care a hang for the whole lot of them!</p>
				<p>He threw off his apron and established himself on a beer-barrel which stood outside before the gate. On the bench opposite sat the older inhabitants of the street, puffing at their pipes and gossiping about everything under the sun. Now the bells sounded the hour for leaving off work. Madame Rasmussen was beating her child and reviling it in time with her blows. Then suddenly all was silent; only the crying of the child continued, like a feeble evening hymn. Old Jeppe was talking about Malaga⁠—“when I ran ashore at Malaga!”⁠—but Baker Jörgen was still lamenting his want of an heir, and sighing: “Yes, yes; if only one could see into the future!” Then he suddenly began to talk about the Mormons. “It might really be great fun to see, some time, what they have to offer you,” he said.</p>
				<p>“I thought you’d been a Mormon a long time, Uncle Jörgen,” said Master Andres. The old man laughed.</p>
				<p>“Well, well; one tries all sorts of things in one’s time,” he said, and looked out at the sky.</p>
				<p>Up the street stood the watchmaker, on his stone steps, his face turned up to the zenith, while he shouted his senseless warnings: “The new time! I ask you about the new time, O God the Father!” he repeated.</p>
				<p>Two weary stevedores were going homeward. “He’ll drive all poverty out of the world and give us all a new life⁠—that’s the form his madness takes,” said one of them, with a dreary laugh.</p>
				<p>“Then he’s got the millennium on the brain?” said the other.</p>
				<p>“No, he’s just snarling at the world,” said old Jörgen, behind them. “We shall certainly get a change in the weather.”</p>
				<p>“Things are bad with him just now, poor fellow,” said Bjerregrav, shuddering. “It was about this time of the year that he lost his wits.”</p>
				<p>An inner voice admonished Pelle: “Don’t sit there with your hands in your lap, but go in and look after your clothes!” But he could not bring himself to do so⁠—the difficulties had become too insurmountable. On the following day Manna and the others called him, but he could not spring over the wall to join them; they had begun to turn up their noses at him and regard him critically. He did not very well understand it, but he had become an outcast, a creature who no longer cared about washing himself properly. But what was the use? He could not go on contending against the invincible! No one had warned him in time, and now the town had captured him, and he had given up everything else. He must shuffle through life as best he could.</p>
				<p>No one had a thought for him! When washing was being done for his employers it never occurred to Madam to wash anything of his, and he was not the boy to come forward of himself. The washerwoman was more considerate; when she could she would smuggle in some of Pelle’s dirty linen, although it meant more work for her. But she was poor herself; as for the rest, they only wanted to make use of him. There was no one in town who cared sufficiently for his welfare to take the trouble even to open his mouth to tell him the truth. This was a thought that made him feel quite weak about the knees, although he was fifteen years old and had courage to tackle a mad bull. More than anything else it was his loneliness that weakened his powers of resistance. He was helpless alone among all these people, a child, who had to look after himself as best he could, and be prepared for attacks from every quarter.</p>
				<p>He sat there, making no effort to dispel the misery that had come over him, and was working its will with him, while with half an ear he listened to the life around him. But suddenly he felt something in his waistcoat pocket⁠—money! He felt immensely relieved at once, but he did not hurry; he slipped behind the gate and counted it. One and a half kroner. He was on the point of regarding it as a gift from on high, as something which the Almighty had in His great goodness placed there, but then it occurred to him that this was his master’s money. It had been given him the day before for repairs to a pair of ladies’ shoes, and he had forgotten to pay it in, while the master, strangely enough, had quite forgotten to ask for it.</p>
				<p>Pelle stood with bent back by the well outside, scrubbing himself over a bucket until his blood tingled. Then he put on his best clothes, drew his shoes on to his naked feet, to avoid the painful feeling of the ragged stockings, and buttoned his rubber collar⁠—for the last time innocent of any tie⁠—to his shirt. Shortly afterward he was standing outside a shop-window, contemplating some large neckties, which had just been put upon the market, and could be worn with any one of four faces outward; they filled the whole of the waistcoat, so that one did not see the shirt. Now he would be disdained no longer! For a moment he ran to and fro and breathed the air; then he got upon the scent, and ran at a breathless gallop toward the sea-dunes, where the young folk of the town played late into the summer night that lay over the wan sea.</p>
				<p>Of course, it was only a loan. Pelle had to sole a pair of shoes for a baker’s apprentice who worked with Nilen; as soon as they were finished he would repay the money. He could put the money under the cutting-out board in his master’s room; the master would find it there, would gaze at it with a droll expression, and say: “What the devil is this?” And then he would knock on the wall, and would treat Pelle to a long rigmarole about his magical gifts⁠—and then he would ask him to run out and fetch a half-bottle of port.</p>
				<p>He did not receive the money for soling the shoes; half the sum he had to pay out for leather, and the rest was a long time coming, for the baker’s apprentice was a needy wretch. But he did not doubt his own integrity; the master might be as sure of his money as if it had been in the bank. Yet now and again he forgot to give up petty sums⁠—if some necessity or other was pressing him unexpectedly. They were, of course, all loans⁠—until the golden time came. And that was never far away.</p>
				<p>One day he returned home as the young master was standing at the door, staring at the driving clouds overhead. He gave Pelle’s shoulder a familiar squeeze. “How was it they didn’t pay you for the shoes at the Chamberlain’s yesterday?”</p>
				<p>Pelle went crimson and his hand went to his waistcoat pocket. “I forgot it,” he said in a low voice.</p>
				<p>“Now, now!” The master shook him good-naturedly. “It’s not that I mistrust you. But just to be methodical!”</p>
				<p>Pelle’s heart pounded wildly in his body; he had just decided to use the money to buy a pair of stockings, the very next time he went out⁠—and then what would have happened? And the master’s belief in him! And all at once his offence showed itself to him in all its shameful treachery; he felt as if he was on the point of being sick, so disturbed was he. Until this moment he had preserved through everything the feeling of his own worth, and now it was destroyed; there could not be any one wickeder than he in all the world. In future no one could trust him any more, and he could no longer look people straight in the face; unless he went to the master at once and cast himself and his shame unconditionally on his mercy. There was no other salvation, that he knew.</p>
				<p>But he was not certain that the master would conceive the matter in its finer aspect, or that everything would turn out for the best; he had given up believing in fairy-tales. Then he would simply be turned away, or perhaps be sent to the courthouse, and it would be all up with him.</p>
				<p>Pelle resolved to keep it to himself; and for many days he went about suffering from a sense of his own wickedness. But then necessity gripped him by the throat and brushed all else aside; and in order to procure himself the most necessary things he was forced to resort to the dangerous expedient of stating; when the master gave him money to buy anything, that it was to be put down. And then one day it was all up with him. The others were ready to pull down the house about his ears; they threw his things out of the garret and called him a filthy, beast. Pelle wept; he was quite convinced that not he was the guilty person, but Peter, who was always keeping company with the nastiest women, but he could get no hearing. He hurried away, with the resolves that he would never come back.</p>
				<p>On the dunes he was captured by Emil and Peter, who had been sent out after him by old Jeppe. He did not want to go back with them, but they threw him down and dragged him back, one taking his head and one his legs. People came to the door and laughed and asked questions, and the other two gave their explanation of the matter, which was a terrible disgrace for Pelle.</p>
				<p>And then he fell ill. He lay under the tiled roof raving with fever; they had thrown his bed into the loft. “What, isn’t he up yet?” said Jeppe, astounded, when he came in to the workshop. “No? Well, he’ll soon get up when he gets hungry.” It was no joke to take a sick apprentice his meals in bed. But Pelle did not come down.</p>
				<p>Once the young master threw all considerations overboard and took some food up to him. “You’re making yourself ridiculous,” sneered Jeppe; “you’ll never be able to manage people like that!” And Madam scolded. But Master Andres whistled until he was out of hearing.</p>
				<p>Poor Pelle lay there, in delirium; his little head was full of fancies, more than it would hold. But now the reaction set in, and he lay there stuffing himself with all that was brought him.</p>
				<p>The young master sat upstairs a great deal and received enlightenment on many points. It was not his nature to do anything energetically, but he arranged that Pelle’s washing should be done in the house, and he took care that Lasse should be sent for.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
