<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title epub:type="z3998:roman">X</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="part-3" id="chapter-3-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">X</h3>
			<p>One day, after his working hours, Pelle was taking some freshly completed work to the Court shoemaker’s. The foreman took it and paid for it, and proceeded to give out work to the others, leaving Pelle standing. Pelle waited impatiently, but did no more than clear his throat now and again. This was the way of these people; one had to put up with it if one wanted work. “Have you forgotten me?” he said at last, a little impatiently.</p>
			<p>“You can go,” said the foreman. “You’ve finished here.”</p>
			<p>“What does that mean?” asked Pelle, startled.</p>
			<p>“It means what you hear. You’ve got the sack⁠—if you understand that better.”</p>
			<p>Pelle understood that very well, but he wanted to establish the fact of his persecution in the presence of his comrades. “Have you any fault to find with my work?” he asked.</p>
			<p>“You mix yourself up too much with things that don’t concern you, my good fellow, and then you can’t do the work you ought to do.”</p>
			<p>“I should like very much to know what fault you have to find with my work,” said Pelle obstinately.</p>
			<p>“Go to the devil! I’ve told you already!” roared the foreman.</p>
			<p>The Court shoemaker came down through the door of the back room and looked about him. When he saw Pelle, he went up to him.</p>
			<p>“You get out of here, and that at once!” he cried, in a rage. “Do you think we give bread to people that undermine us? Out, out of my place of business, Mossoo Trades-Unionist!”</p>
			<p>Pelle stood his ground, and looked his employer in the eyes; he would have struck the man a blow in the face rather than allow himself to be sent away. “Be cool, now; be cool!” he said to himself. He laughed, but his features were quivering. The Court shoemaker kept a certain distance, and continued to shout, “Out with him! Here, foreman, call the police at once!”</p>
			<p>“Now you can see, comrades, how they value one here,” said Pelle, turning his broad back on Meyer. “We are dogs; nothing more!”</p>
			<p>They stood there, staring at the counter, deaf and dumb in their dread of taking sides. Then Pelle went. He made his way northward. His heart was full of violent emotion. Indignation raged within him like a tempest, and by fits and starts found utterance on his lips. Meyer’s work was quite immaterial to him; it was badly paid, and he only did it as a stopgap. But it was disgusting to think they could buy his convictions with badly-paid work! And there they stood not daring to show their colors, as if it wasn’t enough to support such a fellow with their skill and energy! Meyer stood there like a wall, in the way of any real progress, but he needn’t think he could strike at Pelle, for he’d get a blow in return if he did!</p>
			<p>He went straight to Mason Stolpe, in order to talk the matter over with him; the old trades unionist was a man of great experience.</p>
			<p>“So he’s one of those who go in for the open slave-trade!” said Stolpe. “We’ve had a go at them before now. ‘We’ve done with you, my good man; we can make no use of agitators!’ And if one steals a little march on them ‘Off you go; you’re done with here!’ I myself have been like a hunted cur, and at home mother used to go about crying. I could see what she was feeling, but when I put the matter before her she said, ‘Hold out, Stolpe, you shan’t give in!’ ‘You’re forgetting our daily bread, mother,’ I say. ‘Oh, our daily bread. I can just go out washing!’ That was in those days⁠—they sing another tune to us now! Now the master politely raises his hat to old Stolpe! If he thinks he can allow himself to hound a man down, an embargo must be put on him!”</p>
			<p>Pelle had nothing to say against that. “If only it works,” he said. “But our organization looks weak enough as yet.”</p>
			<p>“Only try it; in any case, you can always damage him. He attacks your livelihood in order to strike at your conscience, so you hit back at his purse⁠—that’s where his conscience is! Even if it does no good, at least it makes him realize that you’re not a slave.”</p>
			<p>Pelle sat a while longer chatting. He had secretly hoped to meet Ellen again, but he dared not ask whether that was her day for coming home. Madam Stolpe invited him to stay and to have supper with them she was only waiting for her sons. But Pelle had no time; he must be off to think out instructions for the embargo. “Then come on Sunday,” said the mother; “Sunday is Ellen’s birthday.”</p>
			<p>With rapid strides he went off to the president of the Union; the invitation for the following Sunday had dissipated the remains of his anger. The prospect of a tussle with Meyer had put him in the best of tempers. He was certain of winning the president, Petersen, for his purpose, if only he could find him out of bed; he himself had in his time worked for wholesale shoemakers, and hated them like the plague. It was said that Petersen had worked out a clever little invention⁠—a patent button for ladies’ boots⁠—which he had taken to Meyer, as he himself did not know how to exploit it. But Meyer had, without more ado, treated the invention as his own, inasmuch as it was produced by one of his workmen. He took out a patent and made a lot of money by it, trifling as the thing was. When Petersen demanded a share of the profits, he was dismissed. He himself never spoke of the matter; he just sat in his cellar brooding over the injustice, so that he never managed to recover his position. Almost his whole time had been devoted to the Union, so that he might revenge himself through it; but it never really made much progress. He fired up passionately enough, but he was lacking in persistence. And his lungs were weak.</p>
			<p>He trembled with excitement when Pelle explained his plan. “Great God in heaven, if only we could get at him!” he whispered hoarsely, clenching his skinny fists which Death had already marked with its dusky shadows. “I would willingly give my miserable life to see the scoundrel ruined! Look at that!” He bent down, whispering, and showed Pelle a file ground to a point, which was fastened into a heavy handle. “If I hadn’t the children, he would have got that between his ribs long before this!” His gray, restless eyes, which reminded Pelle of Anker, the crazy clockmaker, had a cold, piercing expression.</p>
			<p>“Yes, yes,” said Pelle, laying his hand soothingly on the other’s; “but it’s no use to do anything stupid. We shall only do what we want to do if we all stand together.”</p>
			<p>The day was well spent; on the very next evening the members of the Union were summoned to a meeting. Petersen spoke first, and beginning with a fiery speech. It was like the final efforts of a dying man. “You organize the struggle,” said Petersen. “I’m no good nowadays for that⁠—and I’ve no strength. But I’ll sound the assault⁠—ay, and so that they wake up. Then you yourself must see to keeping the fire alight in them.” His eyes burned in their shadowy sockets; he stood there like a martyr upholding the necessity of the conflict. The embargo was agreed upon unanimously!</p>
			<p>Then Pelle came forward and organized the necessary plan of campaign. It was his turn now. There was no money in the chest, but every man had to promise a certain contribution to be divided among those who were refusing to work. Every man must do his share to deprive Meyer of all access to the labor market. And there was to be no delirious enthusiasm⁠—which they would regret when they woke up next morning. It was essential that every man should form beforehand a clear conception of the difficulties, and must realize what he was pledging himself to. And then⁠—three cheers for a successful issue!</p>
			<p>This business meant a lot of running about. But what of that! Pelle, who had to sit such a lot, wouldn’t suffer from getting out into the fresh air! He employed the evenings in making up for lost time. He got work from the small employers in Kristianshavn, who were very busy in view of Christmas, which made up for that which he had lost through the Court shoemaker.</p>
			<p>On the second day after his dismissal, the declaration of the embargo appeared under the “Labor Items” in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">The Working Man</i>. “Assistance strictly prohibited!” It was like the day’s orders, given by Pelle’s own word of mouth. He cut the notice out, and now and again, as he sat at his work, he took it out and considered it. This was Pelle⁠—although it didn’t say so⁠—Pelle and the big employer were having a bit of a tussle! Now they should see which was the stronger!</p>
			<p>Pelle went often to see Stolpe. Strangely enough, his visits always coincided with Ellen’s days off. Then he accompanied her homeward, and they walked side by side talking of serious things. There was nothing impetuous about them⁠—they behaved as though a long life lay before them. His vehemence cooled in the conflict with Meyer. He was sure of Ellen’s character, unapproachable though she was. Something in him told him that she ought to be and would remain so. She was one of those natures to whom it is difficult to come out of their shell, so as to reveal the kernel within; but he felt that there was something that was growing for him within that reserved nature, and he was not impatient.</p>
			<p>One evening he had as usual accompanied her to the door, and they stood there bidding one another good night. She gave him her hand in her shy, awkward manner, which might even mean reluctance, and was then about to go indoors.</p>
			<p>“But are we going on like this all our lives?” said Pelle, holding her fingers tightly. “I love you so!”</p>
			<p>She stood there a while, with an impenetrable expression, then advanced her face and kissed him mechanically, as a child kisses, with tightly closed lips. She was already on her way to the house when she suddenly started back, drew him to herself, and kissed him passionately and unrestrainedly. There was something so violent, so wild and fanatical in her demeanor, that he was quite bewildered. He scarcely recognized her, and when he had come to himself she was already on her way up the kitchen steps. He stood still, as though blinded by a rain of fire, and heard her running as though pursued.</p>
			<p>Since that day she had been another creature. Her love was like the spring that comes in a single night. She could not be without him for a day; when she went out to make purchases, she came running over to the “Ark.” Her nature had thrown off its restraint; there was tension in her manner and her movements; and this tension now and again escaped from within in little explosions. She did not say very much; when they were together, she clung to him passionately as though to deaden some pain, and hid her face; if he lifted it, she kept her eyes persistently closed. Then she breathed deeply, and sat down smiling and humming to herself when he spoke to her.</p>
			<p>It was as though she was delving deep into his inmost being, and Pelle, who felt the need to reach and to know that inner nature, drew confidence from her society. No matter what confronted him, he had always sought in his inner self for his natural support, anxiously listening for that which came to the surface, and unconsciously doubting and inquiring. And now, so surely as she leaned silently on his arm, she confirmed something deep within him, and her steadfast gaze vibrated within him like a proud vocation, and he felt himself infinitely rich. She spoke to something deep within him when she gazed at him so thoughtfully. But what she said he did not know⁠—nor what answer she received. When he recalled her from that gaze of hers, as of one bewitched, she only sighed like one awaking, and kissed him.</p>
			<p>Ellen was loyal and unselfish and greatly valued by her employers. There was no real development to be perceived in her⁠—she longed to become his⁠—and that was all. But the future was born on Pelle’s own lips under her dreamy gaze, as though it was she who inspired him with the illuminating words. And then she listened with an absent smile⁠—as to something delightful; but she herself seemed to give no thought to the future. She seemed full of a hidden devotion, that filled Pelle with an inward warmth, so that he held up his head very high toward the light. This constant devotion of Ellen’s made the children “Family” teasingly call her “the Saint.”</p>
			<p>It gave him much secret pleasure to be admitted to her home, where the robust Copenhagen humor concealed conditions quite patriarchal in their nature. Everything was founded on order and respect for the parents, especially the father, who spoke the decisive word in every matter, and had his own place, in which no one else ever sat. When he came home from his work, the grown-up sons would always race to take him his slippers, and the wife always had some extra snack for him. The younger son, Frederik, who was just out of his apprenticeship, was as delighted as a child to think of the day when he should become a journeyman and be able to drink brotherhood with the old man.</p>
			<p>They lived in a new, spacious, three-roomed tenement with a servant’s room thrown in; to Pelle, who was accustomed to find his comrades over here living in one room with a kitchen, this was a new experience. The sons boarded and lodged at home; they slept in the servant’s room. The household was founded on and supported by their common energies; although the family submitted unconditionally to the master of the house, they did not do so out of servility; they only did as all others did. For Stolpe was the foremost man in his calling, an esteemed worker and the veteran of the labor movement. His word was unchallenged.</p>
			<p>Ellen was the only one who did not respect his supremacy, but courageously opposed him, often without any further motive than that of contradiction. She was the only girl of the family, and the favorite; and she took advantage of her position. Sometimes it looked as though Stolpe would be driven to extremities; as though he longed to pulverize her in his wrath; but he always gave in to her.</p>
			<p>He was greatly pleased with Pelle. And he secretly admired his daughter more than ever. “You see, mother, there’s something in that lass! She understands how to pick a man for himself!” he would cry enthusiastically.</p>
			<p>“Yes; I’ve nothing against him, either,” Madam Stolpe would reply. “A bit countrified still, but of course he’s growing out of it.”</p>
			<p>“Countrified? He? No, you take my word, he knows what he wants. She’s really found her master there!” said Stolpe triumphantly.</p>
			<p>In the two brothers Pelle found a pair of loyal comrades, who could not but look up to him.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
